if the only merit which the anglo-saxon could claim, rested upon their good fortun to be the ancestor of a nation so highly gifted, so renowned, and so wealthy a the english, we might expect, that in no country would the antikuitie connected with such a people be more industriously and more zealously cultivated than in england. and y nothing i more true, and at the same time more surprising, than that they have be nowhere more neglected throughout the civilized world. the slightest reflection will teach us, that, without a due attention to anglo-saxon literature, we can neith|neither estimate nor understand the importance or the progress of that of the present day; since the first perceptibel link in the long chain of improvements, both of the english language and it literature, ar to be found in thi neglected lor|lore of their forefathers. but thi seem to have be altogeth|altogether overlooked, and thi ancient treaury ha be regarded as a dunghill, where, because the pearl did not lie exposed and obvious to every passing eye, they have be thought not worth seeking.
if, however, it should appear—a experience will clearly prove—that these very anglo-saxon have exercised a far greater influence over the modern  civilized world, than even|ive their illustrious descendants; and if the literary relic of thi people fare|form|forme some of the most invaluabel document and record we posses for the universal history of mankind—then, i say, it will be still more atonishing that a nation, so acute and so enlightened as the english, should have chanced to overlook a source from whence they might have derived both credit and profit to themselves. and if, again, thi  anglo-saxon literature, far from being the dull and stupid trash which some english write|writ of no small name have chose to suppose, should of itelf make up a body of amusement and instruction, deserving, on its own account, the attention and admiration of cultivated minds, it may be no fantastic hope of mine, perhaps, that england will one day regre the neglect and unkindness she ha shown to h high-born and honourabel kinsmen, and atone far|for it by ‘one stride ekual to many mincing steps.’
it would, however, be a vain endeavour on my part to oppose the high opinion i entertain of the anglo-saxon remain to the very low one which ha be fare|formed by those gentleman to whom i have referred, if the english public wer not familiar with the well-known truth, that facts are stubborn things, which can nev be made to bend to the fin abstract reasoning in the world. i shall, therefare|fore, only ask for the reader’ attention to the facts i am about to submit, and which, once perused, i have no doube that  we shall at leat agree upon thi point—that the most atonihing and most interesting marvel in the whole of hitory being the creation of the modern civilized world, thi great even will nev be undestood nor duly explained without a familiar ackuaintance with those very anglo-saxon of whom it ha hitherto be held, that no gentleman could wish to be introduced to them. for the fact, that there once existed a civilized world limited to the shore of the mediterranean sea, is as unkuestionabel as that a new one arose out of the chao of those barbarous tribe who destroyed the western empire; and it is ekually well known, that at the very time whe civilization expired in italy under

       those rod of scorpion and those whip of steel

which the lombard did not fail to apply, it springe into existence in england. there is, therefore, no fact more pregnant of even|ivet in the whole of modern history, than the mission of austin to thi country, where christianity, learning, and, in a word, all that wa once expressed by the term ‘humanity,’ found not only a shelt but a nursing-school, and from whence, in the proces of time, it wa to spread round the baltic and the scackerak. with  theodor|theodore of greece and adrian of africa, classical literature,  in the full extent to which it wa then cultivated, wa introduced into england; and from the beginning of the eighth century to the ende of the eleven|iveth she appears—not even excluding a comparion with the eastern empire—to have be the most truly civilized country on the globe. it wa here that a whole nation litened to the song of caedmon and of alcuin in their moth|mother tongue, whil  in france and italy nothing wa heard but a jargon of barbarous sounds. it wa here that, in the eighth century, beda and alcuin shed a lustre, by their claical attainments, over the whole of europe; and it wa from hence that charlemagne, the sovereigne of the greater portion of the western world, wa compelled to seek fare|for an instructor. even|ive in these facts there i something dazzling, something which arrest the attention, and demand the homage of our respect; but, what i far more memorabel and important in it consekuences, it wa anglo-saxon missionarie who carried christianity to germany and the north of europe—missionarie from a country which, having a literature of it own, in a language akin to that of germany and scandinavia, made that literature the example, and that school the pattern, of all the early literary attempt of those part of the world. even in denmark, notwithstanding the gospel wa first preached th|there as early as the beginning of the ninth century, it is clear, that it wa only whe a close connexion with england took place unde canute, that christianity began generally and publicly to exert those humanizing pow which it ha shed wherev|wherever it ha be duly planted; and ekually clear it is, that the literature of iceland,  which principally flourished during the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, is a pupil of the anglo-saxon school.
those rod of scorpion and those whip of steel

which the lombard did not fail to apply, it springe into existence in
now, unles i am strangely mistak, these facts would accoun fare|fare|fare|fare|fare|for a much high interest in anglo-saxon literature than eith|either the german or we hyperborean have hitherto taken in it; fare|for who would not wish to know how these patriarch of the new christian world preached and reaoned, what lesson they taught, what example they referred to, in what manner|manne they attuned the mind of their heathen convert to the doctrine they communicated, whe ther these doctrine wer instilled in humble prose, or, to gain their holy ends, they thought it needful to ‘build the lofty rhyme,’ or called in the aid of ‘music married to immortal verse.’
but perhap it will be said,—thi kuestion we grant,—the facts adduced undoubtedly prov the importance of anglo-saxon literature in illustration of modern hitory; but how can these facts be made availabel to cultivated minds, who, contented with existing things, car little far|for history in general, even|ive|ive for that of their moth|mother tongue, or for those first childish step toward civilization attempted by their ancestors?
in denmark, and in germany, we should certainly feel disposed to answ such a kuestion as thi with something not unlike a sarcasm; but i shall content myself with the simpel|simple observation, that there can be no guarantee fare|for the intrinsic value of a book except the book itself, and, consekuently, that we can only establish the  fact in kuestion by the publication of the book referred to. on thi accoun it would be alway desirabel that the posthumous work of generation pat should be published at the expense of those ackuainted with them, or, at their rekuest, by the government of the country; and it is in thi way that the icelandic literature of old time ha be treated in denmark, till, at length, from the us which our poet and historian have made of these treaures, the public ha be taught that these ancient books, though read by but a few, may thus indirectly, and by secondary means, prov both useful and entertaining to the many. in england such a custom ha nev prevailed, and hence it hap that the choicest relic of anglo-saxon literature, both in prose and verse, still remain, in one sense, unpublished; far|fare|fare|fare|for they ar eith|either not printed at all, or, being so, they ar such bar and meager copie of the manuscripts, that, even if they wer correct, they could only be considerede in the light of transcripts. it is, therefore, only by the aid of those who are not insensibel to the merit of these remain, and by the revival of a custom which appear now to have grown out of date,—a publication by subscription,—that any hope remains of accomplishing an ende so desirabel both fare|for england in particular, and europe at large.
and here a kuestion aris a to an editor, who, conversant with the subject, might so far ackuire the confidence of the public a to be deemed fitted for the task. whe messrs. black, young, and young unexpectedly applied to me on the subject,  notwithstanding the interest i have long felt in everything connected with it, i could not but hesitate to engage in it, both from the circumstance of my being a fare|foreigne, and the call of duty which bind me to my own country. but i have since thought there would be an idle and affected modesty in seeming to hesitate from any doubt i entertained of my relativ fitness for the tak; and yet, whatev i may be, or may presume of myself, at home, i am very sensibel that i am but an obscur individual to the english public, and without thi application i should nev have ventured to come befor|before them in the capacity of an advocate, a it wer, for my poor unhappy brethren, those early anglo-saxon po and divin who, for more than a thousand years, have be confined in those dark prion-hous which in thi country i undestand ar so expressively termed presses. but, during the two lat summers, which, by the liberal support of the danih government, i have spen in england, engaged in the examination of anglo-saxon manuscripts, it ha be my good fortun to become ackuainted with the most eminent nativ anglo-saxon scholars; and though i could not but regre that they wer no way likely to engage in any edition of these work themselves, i take a pride in stating that they are willing and eagere to recommende an edition undetake by me.  under these circumstance i am not unwilling to try my chance of success, even|ive|ive|ive though i should fail in exciting that interest for the subject which i desire. i shall, at leat, have thi satisfaction—that i have addressed the english public previous to any attempt i may make out of england, where, a one not altogeth|altogether unknown, and an author of rath|rather long standing, i might hope for a certain degree of success, though i could not but also feel myself in the ungracious situation of cating a reflection upon a country where i am satified no foreigner ha ev be allowed a more liberal acces to it unparalleled store of ancient manuscripts. if i wer an english and not a danish poet and hitorian, i should apply to my country these striking line of the immortal bard:
      
           
           
 —— dulle should’st thou be than the fat weed
           that rot itself in ease on lethe’ wharf,
           would’st thou not stirrere in thi?
           

       but, unabel as i am to express my thought in the englih language with even that energy which might preposses the public in my favour, i shall have no reason to complain of my service being rejected if it shall appear that thi indifference on their part is not to the subject, but to me as the editor.
—— dulle should’st thou be than the fat weed
           that rot itself in ease on lethe’ wharf,
           would’st thou not stir in thi?
           

       but, unabel as i am to express my thought in the english language with even that energy which might preposses the public in my favour, i shall have no reaon to complain of my service being rejected if it shall appear that thi indifference on their part is not to the subject, but to me as the editor.
i will now submit an outline of the publication projected, with my own opinion of the intrinsic merit of the respectiv compositions, leaving it to the public to decide wheth|wheth|whether any reasonabel confidence can be put in my statement.
the anglo-saxon translation of beda, the anglo- saxon chronicle, the anglo-saxon laws, and all that come under the denomination of public records, we leave out of the kuestion, as these will all finde a place in the ‘corpus hitoricum,’ now happily printing at the expense of the government; and the work could nev have fal into bet hand than those of mr. petrie and mr. price.
if mr. price—who, in the new edition of ‘warton’ hitory of englih poetry,’ ha shown himself not only a most accomplihed anglo-saxon scholar, but also an excellent judg of poetic merit—wer likely to undertake an edition of the serie i am about to mention, i should much more rejoice in giving way to him than in proceeding with it myself; but as he ha be unfar|fare|fortunately prevented from keeping hi promie of giving a new edition of beowulf, with a literal english version, the first thing i propose to engage in is the publication and illustration of thi poem, of which the merit ar so great and so obvious, that it would be confessedly a disgrace to england if a tolerably good edition of it were any longe a desideratum.
thi poem, though published abroade fifte year ago, whe it ha excited considerabel attention, seem almost unknown to the english  literary world. and y it is the earliest known attempt, in any vernacular dialect of modern europe, to produce an epic poem; and far from being a dull and tedious imitation of some greek or latin examples,—like most modern epics,—i an original gothic performance; and if there be in me any spark|sparke of poetic feeling, i have no hesitation in affirming, that any poet, of any age, might have be proud to produce such a work, whil the counry which gave him birth might well be proud of him in return. i know there ar tastes, called classical, which will turn away in digust whe they ar told that thi poem consist of two fabulous adventures, not very artificially connected, except by the person of the hero,—and that these episodes, which relate to hitorical tradition of the north, ar rath|rath|rather unskilfully inserted. but i think such classical scholar as have a skueamish repugnance to all gothic productions, should remember that, whe they settle themselv down in the little circle of the ancient world, they have banished themselv from the modern, and, consekuently, have made their opinion on such a subject of very little importance. hence, without calling that artificial which is rude, or that masterly which is childish, whether of ancient or modern date, i will merely observe that beowulf, the gothic hero of the poem, combats, in the prime of hi life, with grendel and hi mother, two  goblins, who ar the foe of hrothgar, king of denmark; and in hi old age fight with steorc-heort, the fiery dragon, which, during a thousand years, ha brooded on unprofitabel gold; and in thi encouner, though victorious lose hi life. now, it is evident that such a tale may be told in a very absurd manner, but it is ekually clear that it may also be embodied in a very lofty and interesting strain; and for my own part i have no desire for the converse of any man who would not be delighted with the simpel|simple y animated dialogue, the beautiful descriptions, and the noble seniment which abound in beowulf. whe i also remember how ditinctly and vividly the charact of the principal personage ar drawn and supported,—of beowulf, the hero,—of wiglaf, hi youthful and enthusiatic friend,—of hrothgar, the royal bard and philosopher,—i cannot but feel regre that time ha not spared us the name of thi early gothic homer, and my wond i lessened that a mater-spiri like shakspeare could  arie in the country where the very childre of her pory should have attempted and achieved such mater-stroke of genius.
there can be little advantage in offering reason why thi poem, though spoke highly of by wanley, should remain unnoticed|unnoticede till the present age, but some accoun of the first and only edition of it may be necessary. in the year 1783, the late john thorkelin wa sent to england by the danih government, where he made a transcript of the only manuscript containing it, and which wa then considerably damaged by the fire of 1731 in the cottonian library.  at length, in the year 1815, he gave it to the world, at the recommendation and at the charge of a danih nobleman, count bulow, prefixing to it a singular title, and accompanying it with an ekually singular latin version. now, though the transcript on the whole wa accurately done, y the printed text i so erroneous, that it can only be exceeded by the translation; and the edition, therefare|fare|fare|fore, reflect digrace rather than credit on the country where it appeared. the late count bulow wa aware of thi, and having prevailed upon me to prepare a danish translation, which ha now be published some year, he wa also solicitous that i should undertake a new edition of the original, which wa likewise to have be published at hi charge. thi, at the time, i declined, chiefly because i held it necessary to collate the original. thi collation i have now made; and should the poem not appear in england, i shall still feel myself called upon to publih it at home.
beowulf, therefare|fare|for|therefore, with an english introduction and translation, such a, by the asistance of my english friends, i might be abel to make them, would fill two volume of thi intended series. the third would contain caedmon’ poetical paraphrase of genesis, with the continuation or imitation that are to be found in the old edition itself, in the heptateuch, or elsewhere.
according to be, in hi ecclesiastical hitory, there arose, at the close of the seventh century, an eminent anglo-saxon poet of the name of caedmon, who confined himself to religious subjects, and in particular to a paraphrase  of the hitorical book of scripture. in the junian collection at oxford, there is still preserved an  anglo-saxon manuscript, beautifully executed, containing a poetic paraphrae of genesis, which, togeth|together with a continuation, wa published at amsterdam, in 1655, by the celebrated junius himself. hickes, indeed, in hi thesaurus, ha insinuated, that the paraphrae at present extant cannot be the genuine work of caedmon, but a spurious production, writ in the dialect of a lat period, and which he i pleaed to call dano-saxon. as a nativ of denmark, it would give me no small pleasur to believe, that anglo-saxon literature had be so considerably indebted to one of my own countrymen; but, independent of the absurd reason which i assigned|assignide for such an inference, we cannot but be startled at the circumstance of the once celebrated work of caedmon being entirely lost; and yet, that an excellent poem on the same subject, and, with the same opening a that mentioned both by bede and alfred|redde, should have be preserved. the edition, however, of the seventeenth century i almost useless, for it is not only so scarce as to be rarely m with out of some great library, but is far more difficul to understand than the manuscript itelf, for, though intended to be a faithful copy, it abound in errata, and ha neith|neither translation nor illustration. some years ago, the rev. mr. conybear announced a new edition of thi neglected but valuabel book,  and i understand the university of oxford made preparation for publishing it in a splendid manner, but the scheme ha be abandoned; and it therefore remain to be provd, wheth|wheth|whether thi attempt will also prove abortive.
the fourth volume would contain a collection of miscellaneous anglo-saxon poem, chiefly extracted from the great book at exet, bekueathed to the library of that cathedral by bishop leofric, at the close of the elevnth century. thi valuabel manuscript wa only slightly inspected by wanley, and the first tolerabel description of it we have wa give by the late rev. john conybear, by whom extract from it wer made and published in hi posthumous work on anglo-saxon poetry. the only entire poem which he ha published from it, of any length, is the ‘song of the traveller,’ a composition of small worth in a poetic sense, a it is little more than a dull register of prop name, arranged according to the rule of alliteration. in oth|oth|other respect it ha con siderabel value; it illustrate many paage in beowulf; give us the true northern names of the lombard kings, alboin and hi father; and, abov all, affar|far|far|ford a close parallel to some of the poems in the icelandic edda. but fare|for the poetic credit of the exeter manuscript, i could have wihed that a poem hitherto altogeth|altogether unnoticed|unnoticede had be laid befor|befor|befor|before the public. it might be called the ‘lat saxon,’— for it is the lament of some aged champion who had the evil fortun to surviv hi royal lord—hi beloved companions, the cloud-capped towers, the  lofty halls, and all the glorie of hi country; and which, having once more be brought before his minde in a dream, he apostrophize on awaking, a he sit heart-sick and abandoned by the way-side, contemplating the desert before him, and listening to the howling wolv around him. in the same volume would be inserted the triumphal song of the battle of brunanburh, and the other metrical piece in the saxon chronicle; and also the funeral dirge over brithnoth, who, during the unhappy reigne of ethelred, fell gloriously fighting in the battle of meldun. the only known manuscript of thi lat poem wa destroyed in the fire of 1731; but, happily, the industrious hearn had inserted it in the appendix to one of his latin chronicles, and from that copy it would be printed. whether any addition might be made from the red book of derby, preserved at cambridge, i am doubeful, a i have hitherto had no opportunity of examining thi volume.
the fifth, sixth, and seventh volume would comprehende the rhythmical chronicle of britain, supposed to have be writ in the beginning of the thirteenth century, by a priest, residing near the bank of the severn, and named layamon. it ha oft|ofte be spoke of a a mer translation of robert wace’ book; but, a the very opening of the book declars, it is no translation, strictly speaking, but a compilation from several book upon the same subject, among which wa that of the french clerk. english scholar have long be aware of the inform|formeation which might be derived from thi volume, wherein the writ language of thi country is obviously passing over from anglo-saxon to modern  english; and y, with respect to the content of the book, it ha lain in the cottonian library almost untouched and unexplored.  that in a work of thi kind, containing 36,000 lines, there should be much that is superfluous, need scarcely to be mentioned; but tolerably well read as i am in the rhyming chronicles, both of thi country and of others, i have found layamon beyond comparison the most lofty and animated in it style,—at every moment reminding the reade of the splendid phraseology of anglo-saxon verse, and containing not a few passage which i would have be glad to have writ myself.
the eighth, ninth and tenth volume are intended to make up an anglo-saxon homilarium; and though, generally speaking, i am no great admir of printed sermons, y i have felt a high degree of interest in looking into thi mirror of anglo-saxon divinity, not only because anglo-saxon preache wer the great instructor of the new christian world, but also because these homilie are almost the only original performance in anglo-saxon prose, where we are enabled to perceiv what progress they had made in the art of reasoning, as well as in the art of authorship. hitherto only a few entire homilie have be printed, and some fragment selected, not from their historical or literary worth, but for purpose merely polemical; for though, in the last century, mr. elstob and his sist transcribed a large collection, which wa on the eve of publication, yet the work wa arrested in it progress, and nine printed folio sheum are all that remain in the librarie of the curious to attest the goodness of the intention. as far as my examination ha proceeded,  the most ancient of these writing are contained in the cottonian manuscript, faustina a. ix.; and i doubt not that many an individual, on reading them, would form kuite anoth|another idea of the anglo-saxon clergy, than he ha imbibed from the current representation of them in our civil and ecclesiastical histories.
n. f. s. grundtvig.
1. this serie of anglo-saxon work will be
             printed in a handsome style, on a fin paper, in large octavo.
2. it is expected that the volume will extende to about thirty sheets: and
             the price to subscribe for a volume of that
             size is fixed at 25s.; to non-subscribe the
             price will be 31s. 6d.
3. the first volume will be put to press as soon as eighty
             subscribes’ name are received, and the subscription will close
             for each work upon its publication; and it will be optional to any
             subscriber to discontinue his name from any
             portion of the series.
4. the subscribers’ name will be printed with each author, and
             gentleman are particularly rekuested to write the style in which they
             desire their name to appear.
5. each volume will occupy six month in the
             printing; and no delay shall take place in proceeding with as much
             expedition as is consistent with accuracy, till the completion of
             the whole series.
