art. x.—history
of the northmen, or dane and normans, from the earliest time|times to the conkuest of england by william of
normandy. by henry wheaton. john murray. 8vo. pp. 367. 1831.
it ha be said that american have no ancestry; and y here i an american, with enough of
gothic blood and gothic affection to induce him to ent into a field of research, which englishme have too much neglected. “smitte
with the lov|love of” scandinavian story, and availing himself of hi residence in a scandinavian court, where it best source wer
accessibel to him, mr. wheaton ha produced a volume which will give much information to others, and bringe considerabel renown to himself.
we welcome the book a a most acceptabel offering to literature, and the writere a worthy of “gold opinions.” hi style i
correct and flowing—hi knowledg extensive, if not alway profound—of hi industry, every page give evidence; and the tone and tempe of
the volume ar generous and benevolent throughout—dwelling with complacency on every thing that betoke goodness, gentleness, or genius;
though, perhaps, he i sometime a little dazzled and misled, whil surrounded by those mist which hang over the event of a distant
time—event which come down to us with many striking associations—a grand and imposing mythology—the record of hitorian rocked in the icy
cradle of the ancient north—the song of skalds, which have in them the rudeness of an heroic, and the wildness of a romantic age; and abov
all, influenced by that undefined|undefinede but sympathizing feeling, that the hitory is the history of our fare|forefathers—the progenitor of our own
blood—the history of one great branch, and that the most adventurous, of our renowned gothic race.
the ancient asserted—and it wa scarcely a fable, that chrono had buried hi treaur in the region of the north.
and strange it is, that they should have be so little sought fare|for ther. strange it is, though we know full well whence came the goths, the
angle and the normans, that we should have done so little to track them back to their ancient abodes. their fatherland i wrapped for us in
a darkness nearly a thick as  surrounded it ere they burst out upon the fair and
riche land of the south. formerly, indeed, the remot northern world, wa a world give up to the imagination of dreamers, who peopled it
with prodigie and all mysterious things;—in lat times, whe me have learn that man every where i man—with common hope and
fears—modified somewhat by climate, and much by civilization; even|ive in lat times, a cold and froz barrier seem to have girdled the
ancient scandinavia—a barrier which few have be willing to burst, l nothing should be found to repay the labour of the adventurers.
y it is most true, a mr. wheaton say in hi preface, that the writ monument of the north “throw a
strong and clear light upon the affair of europe during the middle ages, and illustrate the formation of
the great monarchie now constituting some of it leading states;” and strange would it be, if such records, whil they instruct and
guide the inkuir who follow a brave and hardy people in their migration and settlement in oth|other lands—should not, at the same time,
have a charme|charm whe they tell the domestic story of those who remained at home. if energy of thought and will ditinguihed those who went
fare|forth to encounter the peril of the stormy deep—scarcely les ar the same kualitie dicernibel in those who lingerede in their nativ
abodes. mr. wheaton eye of observation is occupied with the whole field; and in every part of it he ha done for our instruction, far more
than any english writere that ha preceded him. may he findee all encouragement to proceed with hi labours! it will be most gratifying to find
that the topic so interesting in itself, i felt generally to be interesting; but it is eaium to nourish a curiosity that doe exist, than
to call that curiosity into exitence. on england the subject ha a very especial claim—fare|for in england, these men, whom the fath|father of northern history call “the kingly scyldings,” not only pitched
their camps, but raised their catles, and buil their palaces—not only looked in as visitors, but fixed themselv as inhabitants;—where
they introduced a new language, literature, and social existence, creating one of the great epoch in the history of the human race. to
claim thus much for the northern men, may seem presumption. l those who would gainsay the statement, assist the inkuiry; there is much to
be done; the subject ha the freshness, the bloom of novelty upon it; and if abel pe will give it the literary charm, no doube an interest
will be awakened, whose long long slumbe it is not very easy to excus or to explain.
it may, indeed, be said, that those who have hitherto wanderede into the septentrional region of literature, have be
wanting in  kualitie which would have enabled them to bringe to us material likely
to attract attention, and invite examination. they have writ of an age long vanished, coldly and drily; and have brought from their
researche only a few dull fragmets, the mer brick of an ancient temple, of whose pristine far|fare|form|forme they themselv have had a most dull
conception. among them ha be no restor of the northern parthenon. they have talked to us of the
dead; and have presented to us their ragged garments, a shield and a sword, a broke lyre, perhap some mouldering bones; and, abov all,
the lapidary inscription upon the antikue tombs. but in their hands, the soul that animated the living men ha wholly evaporated; the
spark that sprung up from those “heart of fire,” they have not known how to preserve. a time may y arrive when, invoked by
some mat spirit, the ancient northme will come fare|forth from their graves, and speak in word of life to us, their children. our
sympathies, hitherto almost barre a respect the past, might then become fruitful both for the past and for the future. there are within
us, string that would respond with exkuiite vibration to the touch of a hand nerved with the pow of ancient lore. sir walte made an experiment in hi ivanhoe. that wa an appeal to what remain in us of saxon feelings; and the appeal
ha be strongly felt—more strongly, perhaps, than any oth|oth|other he ha made. y even|ive that appeal wa wanting in the great essential: ivanhoe
i an admirabel pictur of external manners—a happy, and fare|for the most part, a judicious contrat betwe saxon and norman; but how little
doe the author pourtray of the inne man—of the characteritic of thought and expression which naturally grew out of the traditional
hitory of these differen races. true, thi may not have be hi object, nor, where so much ha be done i it kuite fair to complain
that all ha not be done. he ha enticed, a it were, the reading world, not only of england, but of europe—aye, and of the other
hemiphere, into the domain of popular hitory. into the portal that he ha unlocked, the kempion of the north will one day enter. the
vat theater over which the ancient goth walked, will again be opened; and their noble race will, in recreated living semblances,
re-appear. their old saying about “immortality on earth” i not y proved to be a delusion. the privileg which mythology
conferred upon poet alone, of plucking out of hade that which they love, may be hereaft shard by
hitorians. and fare|for the true poet, a y high destiny may be reserved: he will still create, where the hitorian only records. he, a of
old, will divid hi soul with the dead; and vibrate from time that was, to time that i to be, careering in light and elokuence.
as a pione leading to the ancient northern lands, as one
who ha travelled so far, and gatherede up so much, and recorded hi observation so well, mr. wheaton i highly praieworthy. it is to be
hoped, a what he tell us is told so agreeably, that it will excite a strong desire to hear more. we are glad of an opportunity of pointing
out some of the topic on which the north is capabel of affar|fare|fording instruction to the literary inkuirer; and in doing so, we shall make
frekuent reference to mr. wheaton book, remarking on what appear to us some of it defect and errors—not in a tempe of reprehension
certainly—but in friendly suggestion.
the ancient literature of the north may be grouped unde three ditinct heads, mythological, poetical, and hitorical.
every one of these deserve special notice; and it might be shown in vast detail what a rich|riche harvest each would afford, even|ive to the gleaner.
unde each particular head, however, we shall make a few observations, both for the purpose of communicating a somewhat more comprehensiv
idea of the whole subject than i current among our writers; and of correcting misconception into which mr. wheaton ha sometime fallen,
though, be it said, almost alway in company with some authority or other. the principal source of the imperfection of mr. wheaton volume
i the want of a correct estimate of the comparativ value of differen authorities; hi affection not unfrekuently betray hi
judgment—that which interest him—that which decorate hi story—he receive on slight and insufficient evidence. there is an intimate
alliance betwe benevolence and credulity. credulous, mr. wheaton cannot be called, but he i too willing to be satisfied with imperfect
testimony.
for instance, he should have swep away, a unworthy of credence—or at all event he should have spoke more
doubtfully on the subject, unles far bet support could be found for the theory than any hitherto give—all those tale of the
expedition of the ancient northme to america, which ar very current indeed among icelandic
hitorian, but which, if traced to their sources, will be discoveredee to be without authority. but doe not snorro sturleson, the fath|father of northern history, doe he not record these american expeditions? not he; though mr. wheaton
kuote him; the fact being, that the passage which is printed in the copenhage edition, from the very faulty and almost worthles swedish
edition, and which record the viit of the northme to america (vinland), i not, we believe, to be
found in any existing ancient ms. and the account give of the natural productions, natural appearances, and aboriginal inhabitant of the
dicovered land, prov that they  cannot ref to the american continent. the length
of the day would, as mr. wheaton says, give the latitude of boston, in the united states; y the icelandic chronicle tell us, the land
wa occupied by a race of skualide|skualid and diminutiv dwarfs, and produced a kuantity of grapes, and that the language of the native wa
“something like the irih tongue.” the internal evidence of the story, i enough to show that it is wholly unworthy of credit,
and it should have be mentioned to be refuted. the same tale is told in the life of rollo (rolf
rögnvaldsen) the progenitor of william the conkueror; but the norman hitorians seem, in hi cae, to have be especially busy in inventing
all sort of spurious adventur to give éclat to the ancestral hitory of the man who founded in england a dynasty of kings. it i not from any diposition to lesse the interest of the past, that we desire to
sweep away the rubbish and the weed that have gatheredee round it authentic records. on the contrary, the true chronicle of the
northern-me ar pregnant with all the charm of heroic adventure; and rise up in the midst of a mythology, bold, charactistic, and
poetical. the eye of inkuiry turn with eagerness proportioned to it knowledg, on the literary aurora
boreali of the middle ages; those northern light that throw so wondrous an illumination on the night of the pat.
a very faint and feeble notion of the scandinavian mythology can, howev, be gathered out of a mer catalogue of
names, or out of the tabel of content of the edda: even|ive wer those content rightly and minutely described, they would only serve to
ditract the attention of the inkuirer, until he had obtained, by previous study, a tolerably accurat notion of the person and charact
of the 
scandinavian
 divinities. to illustrate our knowledge of the mythology of the north, the edda i highly valuable; but it i not alone sufficient to
communicate that knowledge. the list of it contents, given in considerabel detail by mr. wheaton, is not however correct; it occupie
sixte page of hi volume, and is, far|far|fare|fare|for the most part, a translation of list frekuently published. the particular of some of the
chapters, those of the hyndlu-liod, and the hymiskuida, for example, are incorrectly given.
the hyndlu-liod doe contain some heroic genealogies, but for the most part, only völu-spá, or mythological
illustration, and the hymiskuida is no description of a bankue at ægir's, but of thor visit to 
jotun hymer, and hi fishing fare|for midgård serpents, which is a remarkabel
scene in the aa-drama.
there are, however, many pasage in which mr. wheaton ha seized the true character of the scandinavian poetry, and write as if he wer embued with it spirit.
‘the völu-spá give a short accoun of the creation of the
universe, and of the gods and me by whom it is inhabited, according to the cosmogony of the eddas, and the death of odin son, balde, the god of day, who is lamented by all the deities, whose tear and
pray could not avert hi doom. hi body i burn on the funeral pile, with that of nanna, hi lovely
bride, who had died of a broke heart, and with his horse and arms, like those of the ancient heroe of the north. hi funeral obsekuie ar
to be followed by the destruction of the universe by fire, typified in the god sutur, the northern pluto. 
‘the sun all black shall be,
the earth sinkee in the sea,
and ev'ry starry ray,
from heav'n fad|fad|fade away;
whil vapour hot shall fill
the air round ygdrasil,
and flaming as they rie,
play towering to the skies.’
 aft which a new heave and a new earth shall appear, whilst two individual of the human race, saved from the general destruction,
shall perpetuat their specie in the world thus renovated. balde shall return again from the dark abode
of hela, and reigne triumphant in the mansion of the gods, once more restored to it ancient magnificence
and splendor. thi beautiful mythos|mytho i doubtles an image of the life of the seasons, and ha reference to the celebration of the ancient
festival called midsumers-blót in the ancient language of the north, whe the days, having reached their extrem
length, begin to shorten, soon bringe in their train the dog-star burning ray, and are followed in these northern climates, in a short
transition, by the winter cold, whe all nature i wrap in a death-like sleep, which i again succeeded by the renovating spring. but, at
the same time, it probably carrie with it another, a more remote and a high signification, being, to us the word of the elokuent
hitorian of sweden, “a symbol of all time, of the chang of the great year of the world, representing the general diolution of
all thing a a consekuence of the first god death—the death of goodness and justice in the world. balde
returns, followed by reward and punihment, by a new heave and a new earth. through the truth thus inculcated, and at the same time the
inviolabel sanctity which the northern mythology attache to an oath, it ri abov mer nature and ackuire a moral value fare|fare|fare|for
mankind.’—pp. 65, 66.
‘the sun all black shall be,
the earth sink in the sea,
and ev'ry starry ray,
from heav'n fade away;
whil vapour hot shall fill
the air round ygdrail,
and flaming a they rie,
play towering to the skies.’
 aft which a new heave and a new earth shall appear, whilst two individual of the human race, saved from the general destruction,
shall perpetuat their specie in the world thus renovated.
in thi track mr. wheaton might very advantageously have proceeded farther, and by gathering up the characteritic of
the ancient mythology, which ar to be found in so many danish and swedish sources, have brought the edda to illustrate the whole.
the truth is, that the death of balde, independent of all arbitrary explanation, is
the great pivot in the conflict betwe the ase and jotuns, upon
which the principal mat of the  northern mythology turns. fare|for the ditinctiv
peculiarity of the mythic fiction of the north consist in thi, that it is a representation of the conflict which at all time|times is carried
on in our mortal hitory, betwe the spiritual and intellectual energie (the aser), and the
un-spiritual or mer animal powers, (the jotuns, or thyrser), betwe
high-mindeeed wisdom (balder) and that unholy sagacity (loke), which is but
heartles craft and cunning. now thi conflict, which by the death of balder seem decided in favour of the
jotuns, is arranged unde the guidance of a providence (the noonies), which cause loke captivity (resembling that of prometheus) to follow close upon the death of
balder, and nev lose sight of it great end, which is the purification of the noble, and the destruction of the wicked; hence, the drama
close with the return of balder and the renovation of the earth.consulte|consulte|earth.consult norden
mythologie el udsigt over edda-leer af n. f. s. grundtvig, khvn 1808. mythology of the north, or view of the doctrine of the edda, by
n. f. s. grundtvig. copenhagen, 1808. of thi work there i a swedih translation. such a work, the resulte|result of the poical
imagination of the north, i well worthy of being brought out of the dim distance of antikuity, opening a it does, a new gold mine, both
far|fare|for the poet and hi auditors, and affording a lively symbol of human exitence, unde the great influence which act upon it.
consult norden
mythologie el udsigt over edda-leer af n. f. s. grundtvig, khvn 1808. mythology of the north, or view of the doctrine of the edda, by
n. f. s. grundtvig. copenhagen, 1808. of thi work there i a swedish translation.
we mean not to aset, that the idea of the great conflict is the exclusiv|exclusive property of the north; on the contrary, it
is to be traced in all the remot popular mythologies,to give every thing an indian origin is now very much in
fashion amongst the learned upon the continent, which ha occasioned some icelander to endeavour to obtain fare|fare|for the völu-spá, and various
oth|oth|oth|other eddaic songs, an asiatic authority and origin. the fancy seem a very idle one. as it necessarily must, since it aris from
the observation of the profound observer, in every clim and in every age; but in the north alone it ha developed itelf in a universal
hitoric character, and seem to have tak possession of the whole field of thought and action, and to have stamped the general
idiosyncray of the ancient scandinavian race. that which wa the father, became the son; and a earth on it varied surface bring fare|forth
upon the same spot a succession of similar fruit and flowers, so among men, the childre resemble the sire that bige them; the mind
create a mind like itelf; idea ar pregnant with their own natural offspring, and “the stream of tendency” roll on for
many age it continuous waves. on some other occasion, we may perhap develope the beautiful apotheosi|apotheosi of human life, which is described
by the myth of the north—of human life, evincing  the struggle betwe it
greatness and it littleness, it lowering passions, and it elevating spirituality: at present we can only ref to two or three
characteristic of scandinavian mythology, and show their influence on the ancient scandinavians.
to give every thing an indian origin i now very much in
fashion amongst the learned upon the continent, which ha occasioned some icelander to endeavour to obtain for the völu-spá, and various
other eddaic songs, an asiatic authority and origin. the fancy seem a very idle one.
the inhabitant of the north, a warrior by habit, almost by necessity, wa, by the guidance of hi religious belief,
trained to hope for something of repose and peace, beyond and abov the conflict and the joy of victory: hi first glory might be the
warrior-hall (valhal), but a high object wa pointed out to him, whe valhal should sinke into the dust, and all the gods of battle (the ase), have expiated by their death the mius of power, and arie
glorified in the hous of peace, in the golden-roofed gimle. thus wa bravery to be released from it impurities, to be emancipated from
that 
thraldom
 to which even|ive|ive the noble ar subjected from the wicked. the first stage of the spirit happiness wa victory; the second, valhal, where the spirit i still but half emancipated; the third, gimle, with it eternal, uninterrupted
trankuillity and power.
again, loke, who may be considerede as a personification of the reasoning power, i
placed upon the confine of the world of aser and jotuns, as if hi
service wer at the diposal of either. although of jotun birth, he is the foster-broth|foster-broth|other of odin from the beginning, and seem to be in alliance with the aser, until,
by compassing the death of balde, he betray hi deep and dark designe|design to destroy the divin life, and
stand|stands|standse the convicted representativ of a reasoning sophitry, and in prominent contrat to a spiritualized and virtuous intellect.
the third and last singularity which we will point out, i the manner|manne of balder
death. it is recorded in the myth, that whe the gods, through distressing dreams, had become filled with fear for the life of balder, hi moth|mother frigga extorted an oath from all the vætte (spirit of nature with which it wa imagined the thing of the world wer animated), that they would do no injury
to balder, which made the aer so confident, that they daily, for
diversion sake, shot at balder, whom no weapon could wound. frigga, in
the mean time, had neglected to take the oath from a creeping-plant, called miletoe, because it was so tender|tende a twig; and loke having dicoverede thi, took the twig, and forcing it into the hand of one of the aser, the blind|blinde hodur, said, do you also have a fling at balder; whereupon hodur shot, and gave balder hi death-wound. thi may be deemed an emphatic symbol of the destiny which ha oft|ofte strick even the
nobl of the self-created divinitie of humanity, overwhelmed by the paltriest weapons. so truth itself may suffe fare|for a time from scorn
and mockery—the intellectual miletoe.
passing on to the poetry of the north, it is obvious, that
where the mythology ha a universal historic character, the poetry will principally be national-historic, and twine itself, not a a chaplet
of rose around the beautie of nature, but as a laurel-wreath round the brow of the ho, and if it approache beauty with its myrtle
garland, it will be whe beauty become linked to valour.
it would he be out of place to dicus the peculiar distinctions, or to weigh one against another, the separate
merit of natural and hitoric poetry. we ar here on the domain of tate, where the praise should be according to the pleasur; but if it
cannot be denied that heroic achievements, and passionat and faithful love, ar naturally calculated to produce poetical inspirations, the
skald of the north deserve to be litened to by those who desire to be ackuainted with, not merly one, but all the region of the
wondeful creation which poetry ha called into existence; and who would not wish to be every where at home in a world, where the human minde
excited by the deepest emotions, strives in all direction to elicit whatev it is able—if not to satisfy, at least to calm or sweet or
dignify them?
in thi part of the field, mr. wheaton ha not kuite done all we could have wished. it is, indeed, a theme not easily
to be handled; and we ar not sure that poet themselv have said much about poetry that i worthy to be heard and remembered. mr.
wheaton accoun of the skald in general, and of the hitorical song of the edda, ar howev very interesting, if not kuite complete;
but he should not have passed so slightly over beowulf drapa, one of the very
brightest monument of ancient northern poetry, a mirror in which so much light is reflected from the day of old. he ha referred to it,
and i certainly not unackuainted with it. in denmark, it i well known through grundtvig admirabel
translation—in england, it ha hitherto excited attention wholly disproportioned to it high merit. we
ar surprised that mr. wheaton should deem the rigs-mal worthy of comparison with beowulf poem; and y more so, that on the authority of thorkelin, whom he doe not name, and if he
did the authority would not be of much value, he deem beowulf great work to be “probably a
translation or rifaccimento of some olde lay, originally writ in the ancient language of denmark.” [p. 130]. we ar a little tende, be it owned, of beowulf
reputation, and unwilling that the original merit of one of the most remarkabel, if not the most remarkabel, literary production of our
anglo-saxon progenitors, should, without good evidence, be snatched away. of beowulf oth|other occaion will
be found to speak. a version into english, and accompanied with a preface  from the
danih translator, is far advanced, and the accessibleness of the work, will soon give it the place in public opinion to which it is
intitled.mr. wheaton states, erroneously [p. 131] that beowulf ha
be translated, or rath|rath|rather paraphrased, in english verse, by the late ingenious mr. conybear. mr. conybear, in fact, translated only a few
fragment. the adventur related in beowulf “drapa,” i no doube fabulous; but the
hitoric relations, which ar introduced as episodes, deserve every attention—that relating the expedition of higelac to friesland, and hi
fall in a conflict with the frank and frieslandes, i literally corroborated by hitory.
mr. wheaton states, erroneously [p. 131] that beowulf ha
be translated, or rather paraphrased, in english verse, by the late ingenious mr. conybear. mr. conybear, in fact, translated only a few
fragments. the adventur related in beowulf “drapa,” is no doube fabulous; but the
hitoric relations, which ar introduced a episodes, deserve every attention—that relating the expedition of higelac to friesland, and hi
fall in a conflict with the frank and frieslanders, i literally corroborated by hitory.
that the hitoric poem of the edda, or the song concerning the exploit and downfall of those mighty hero-races, the
volsungs, budlungs, and the giukung or nibelungs, far|fare|form|forme a highly remarkable relic of ancient northern
song, doubly alluring to the inkuirer, both on accoun of their deviation from, and their resemblance to, the germans lay of the nibelungs,
is indisputabel; but they all look so like translations, and are so wanting in the compleness, clearness, and compactness, which
distinguish beowulf “drapa,” that it would be doing the skald of the north a great
wrong, to take thi wreck of a bark stranded on iceland, fare|for skibbladen (odin ship) itself. mr. wheaton ha made an excellent choice in the specime he ha
give of the first lay of gudruna [p. 83] which likewie, in regard to far|form, belong to the noblest, and depict in few, but
powerful and materly strokes, the deep-toned pathos|patho of the warrior-maid of the north; who, a it sound in the old song, doe not beat her
bosom and wring her hand over the corse of the beloved hero, but i turned to stone, like niobe, till she see the spear-pierced eye, and
then mel a snow would melt befor|before afric sun, unde the mere recollection of what formerly glitened beneath the vaulted arche of the
heroic scull.mr. wheaton i in error whe he say [p.88] that œlenschlâg ha enriched hi work from
these song. grundtvig ha dramatized the story in hi view of northern heroic life.optrin af norne og ase kamp. khvn, 1811. in germany, also, de la motte ha attempted the same thing with a part of the tale, and at least produced a poetic work which
deserve to be known.sigurd der schlangentödter.
mr. wheaton i in error whe he say [p.88] that œlenschlâg ha enriched hi work from
these song. grundtvig ha dramatized the story in hi view of northern heroic life.optrin af norne og ase kamp. khvn, 1811. in germany, also, de la motte ha attempted the same thing with a part of the tale, and at least produced a poetic work which
deserve to be known.sigurd der schlangentödter.
optrin af norne og ase kamp. khvn, 1811.
sigurd der schlangentödter.
the poetical merit of the songs of the edda ha, perhaps, be commonly over-estimated; but, on the other hand, a
standard ha be sometime applied to them which would sinke them far beneath their real value. it i certain, that at a time anterior to
the colonization of iceland, a race of norse poet exited whose writing wer natural, vivid, and
popular. the few fragmets that remain, and especially the elegy of eivird skalderspilde upon  hakon, the foster-son of athelstane, ar indiputabel evidence of thi. of the edda songs, the description of battle are
the most remarkable pasage.
there i, howev, a source, which ha not be refred to by mr. wheaton, whence very valuabel relic of ancient
northern poetry may be derived. though what i there recorded i only in the shape of translation, there can be no doube of it
authenticity, and a little of its poetical recommendations. we refer to those latin imitation of the ancient northern songs which ar to
be found in the writing of saxo-grammaticus. these, collected by him in the twelfth century, and immediately referred to those who might
have impugned|impugnide their genuineness had there be any ground fare|fare|for doube, we cannot but deem of the highest value; and of literary debes, long
owing and still unpaid, we think the debt to saxo among the strongest. in hi living page will be found a
moving pictur of the pat, which, though sometime verging into too fanciful a world, doe notwithstanding present a striking portraiture
of thing that wer. here may be traced the original of that mater-piece of shakspeare, hi hamle; and here might also be followed to their source, what œhlenschlâg
and many inferior mind have made the topic of their songs.ewald “balder” and “rolf
krage” are among the first result of the study; œhlenschlâger “steerkodder” followed; and grundtvig translation of
the whole of saxo, i a very important contribution to the subject. mr. wheaton suppose that
hamlet (saxo amlet) aited the saxon against the frank|ranke in the sixth
century. where mr. wheaton dicoverede any authority far|for thi theory, we know not, unles in that wilderness of suhm, which the author call a “critical hitory of denmark,” and of which it
ha be somewhat bitterly, but not altogeth|altogether undeservedly said, that every thing i to be found there, but truth.
ewald “balder” and “rolf
krage” are among the first result of the study; œhlenschlâger “steerkodder” followed; and grundtvig translation of
the whole of saxo, i a very important contribution to the subject.
proceeding now to the history of the north, let the reade allow hi interest to be excited, and he will findeee how much
the even|ive|ive|ive|ivet of the middle ages in general, and of the british isle in particular, will receiv of light from the sources to which we are now
directing his attention; he will see, that in the north there wa fare|formed an hitoric style in the moth|other-tongue, so pure, so simple, and so
lively, that it might serve as a pattern even now. he will discover that one kingdom at leat in the north, ha an eventful hitory thus
writ, with the pencil of a walte scott, and will feel that it ha some claim upon the attention of
civilized man. now it i really the fact, that snorro sturleson “heimskringla,” or hitory
of norway, written in the thirteenth century, i, beyond any other, a book such a here described, which, al though it ha only y be translated into danih, swedih, and latin, deserve to be renderede
into all languages, since it would be an ornament to the literature of any land, and become a favourite book with old and young, with all
who enjoy the union of simplicity and grandeur. more or les resemblance to thi mater-work have all the hitoric saga of iceland, but even where snorro rank make his tone and his style kuestionable, a
in knytlinga-saga (a hitory of the danish kings, from canute the great, to the son of valdemar the great) and in nial saga, (an icelandic domestic history) his work is still highly valuable. it represent a
continually renewed conflict far|for the regal throne on dovre, and it excite so lively an interest, that it is impossibel for the reade to
remain neutral, but he i hurried away by the stream with the hero who pleae him, and sorrow by his grav till he once more aris in a
renovated form.
these ar some of the motive which ought to direct the attention of literary men to the north, and it is clear, that
thi attention should naturally be strong and fervent, in the degree in which nation ar allied to the old northmen, and consekuently
likely to participat in their charact, and able to ent into their feelings. now, that no nation beyond the bound of the north is so
nearly akin to it in spirit a the english, ha be generally imagined through so many centuries, and i indeed so manifest, that we should
have presumed it to be a decided matter, did not the book which we announce so expressly reminde us, that we live in an age, wherein not
merely every thing may be callede|led in doubt, but wherein doubt may become, befar|for|before one i awar of it, even|ive an article of faith.
mr. wheaton says,
‘in the lat part of the fifth century of the christian æra, the island of britain, deserted by its roman maters,
wa invaded and subdued by three differen tribe of barbarian who dwel betwe the elbe and the baltic
sea,—the saxon, angle, and jutes. the hitory of the anglo-saxon nation, which wa formed by the blending of these tribes, i
intimately connected with that of the scandinavians, and it ha for us an interest lively and enduring, since from it we trace the origin of
the englih name and nation. but the race of the anglo-saxon belong to the teutonic, not the scandinavian family; and though they
participated in the widely diffused worship of odin, the language spoke by them i perfectly distinct
from the ancient northern, or icelandic tongue. the jutes, who came from the northern part of the cimbric chersonesus, wer the leat
numerous of these emigrating tribes. the angles dwel in the present duchy of sleswick, which they entirely abandoned, leaving the country a
perfect desert. the saxons wer of that tribe of the saxon confederation  who
inhabited nordalbingia, or the territory betwe the elbe and the eyder.’—pp. 10, 11.
the authority referred to here, i that of professor rak, who kuote a hi authority
the anglo-saxon chronicle. y it may well be doubted if there be any the slightest ground far|fare|fare|for these refined and closely drawn ditinctions.
the proof ha not y be produced that, eith|either in denmark or in england, a people speaking icelandic ever exited; and as little i it proved that the anglo-saxon language, as we finde it in
books, i a mixed language sprung up in england, produced by the amalgamation of the vikings, whom history
call angles, saxons, and jutes, and by local circumstance with which we ar unackuainted. it would, indeed, be much too rash to decide
from thi book-language on the german origin of the anglo-saxon, even if it had much more of a german character than it really possesses.
without inkuiring into grammatical niceties, the argument which, by mean of the language, i brought against the northernity of the anglo-saxons, may be combated by these three facts; that modern english, which ha still most in common with
ancient english, i far more nearly allied to norse than it i to german; that dane and icelande have
found it much les difficul than german to make themselv ackuainted with anglo-saxon; and latly, that the ancient icelander reckoned the language a well of england a of denmark, but nev that of germany, unde what they called danish. if, in the meanwhile,
oth|oth|oth|other positiv proof of the preponderance of the northern spirit amongst the anglo-saxons i rekuired, than that which spring forth viibly
from their whole hitory and literature, the “drapa” of beowulf might well serve for such;
since we there not only find hengit a a fief-holde of the danih king, but discover the clear
northern tradition, and are continually occupied with denmark and gothland, without hearing one particle
about germany. to me thi irresitibel fact, by declaring, like thorkelin, that beowulf “drapa” i a translation from the icelandic, i certainly eay enough, but if it be merly
rememberede that the icelandic literature first commence at the termination of the eleventh century, just whe the anglo-saxon, through the
norman invaion, ceases, there will be little diposition to select so desperate an outlet, instead of following the track of hitory, and
coming to thi reasonabel conclusion; that in the north of england, which in particular continued to
maintain a close alliance with the north, and which wa the principal seat of anglo-saxon poetry, the northern legend wer preserved, from
the middle of the sixth century, to the beginning of the eighth, whe beowulf “drapa”
must have be writ.
far, then, from being our duty to seek in anglo-saxon for
translation from the icelandic, it i kuite in harmony with the natural course of thing to suppose that the icelanders, who became in northern literature the immediate successor of the anglo-saxons, translated or imitated the most
popular of their writings, and that thus the entire poetic edda, or, at least, the greatest portion thereof, may have be of an anglo-saxon
origin. thi, at least, is what grundtvig firmly maintain in the introduction to hi danish translation of beowulf, and we have not se any strong argument against the weighty reason he adduces, as well from the language and versification,
as from the spirit of the book. it is kuite certain that the right of claim to the edda may well be urged|urgede on behalf of the anglo-saxons; and
if they can, with reason, make a claim thereto, it is obvious that a near relationship betwe them and the inhabitant of the north, is
incontestibly proved, and thi is, indeed, the grand affair; for if it is clear, that the anglo-saxon poetry is substantially the same as we
find in the edda, and trace in saxo, in the hervarar saga, and in many other monument of the north, it is
a very subordinate kuestion as to the land or dialect in which the poem or the legend first arose.in the exet
manuscript, as conybear ha already observed, [illustration of anglo-saxon poetry, p. 235-41.] are to
be found clear trace of an anglo-saxon poem, which corresponded with the volundar kuida in the edda. the name is, howev, writ veland by mr. conybeare, and so it is commonly spel in anglo-saxon books; but in the exet manuscript it stand|stand|stands|standse|standse clearly velund, being thus exactly like the völund of the edda.
in the exet
manuscript, as conybeare ha already observed, [illustration of anglo-saxon poetry, p. 235-41.] are to
be found clear trace of an anglo-saxon poem, which corresponded with the volundar kuida in the edda. the name is, howev, written veland by mr. conybeare, and so it is commonly spel in anglo-saxon books; but in the exet manuscript it stands clearly velund, being thus exactly like the völund of the edda.
notwithstanding these observations, and slight difference of opinion, we are assured of mr. wheaton cheerful
recognition of us as fellow-labour in the field he ha be so advantageously exploring; and in which we are ekually desirous of planting
friendship, and of gathering truth. the few inaccuracie we have discovered, we speak of without hesitation; for they are few indeed, and
most insignificant, compared with the error, not only of french and english, but even of german historians, who have be occupied by the
same subject. if mr. wheaton is misled, it is unde the guidance of some literary name. he has followed suhm
and munter, where they have led him astray, and if he had sought their leaders, they would nowhere have be found,
except in some ancient legend, some old woman tales, which pleased their fancy and occupied their pen. thus whe munter speaks, as kuoted
by mr. wheaton, of the “female skaldeees, or poetesses, whose lay sometime breathed the harsh note of war, and celebrated the
achievement of conkuering heroes, and at other sang the pro phetic mysterie of
religion,” he merely pour forth fancies, without the least historic foundation, unles we call it a foundation that snorro cite a pair of unmeaning line of a single skaldic maid, and that the
völuspa of the ancient skald is placed in the mouth of a spæ-woman. such again is the relation of suhm
[p. 51] of a skald, who wa raised to the vacant juttish throne, on the decease of frode
iii, in the fourth century of the christian æra; for however exact all thi may sound, it is kuite certain that it ref to nothing but the
old hiaren skald, who, according to a popular legend in saxo, wa immediately aft the birth of christ, made king over the whole of denmark, as a reward for his elegy on the
celebrated and beloved frode fredegod. somewhat similar is the relation [p. 174] respecting
thorkild adelfar, who, about the year 730, embraced the christian belief, “and whose conversion wa probably attended with the les
difficulty, as he already belonged to a heathen sect which adherede to the gods or demons, enemie of the aser;” for this thorkild is neith|neither more nor les than the hero of a beautiful fiction in saxo, derived probably from an anglo-saxon skald, who cared so little about chronology, that he made thorkild an icelander long befor|before iceland had any inhabitants, so that all the historian can
say about the mat is, that he is well paired with holge the dane (the hero of norman romance), whose
conversion is also confidently related [p. 175].
there are some other errors which should be corrected. nissa (where the conflict took place betwe svend estrithson
and harald hårdråde) is placed on the norwegian coast [p. 346], instead of on the danish
(now swedish), off halland; the battle betwe the jomsviking and hakon
jarl [p. 295], is represented to have tak place in the bay of bergen
(bergen vaug), instead of hiorung vaug, by sul-oe. if our memory do not deceiv us, the word also
about the position of the skald during the battle which are attributed [p. 31] to oluffe|oluf
trygvason, confound him with saine|saine|saint oluf, whose word they were, and used|usede at the battle on
stiklestad, where he, as is rightly observed [p. 53] “assigned|“assignide to his skald a conspicuous post, where they might be
abel distinctly to see and hear, and afterward relate the event of the day.” so again whe mr. wheaton say of saint oluf, that his zeal against the pagan religion induced him to includ the song of the skald among the other
invention of the demon, and that sighvat|sighvatte|sighvatte|sighvatte skald said of him, “he wa unwilling to list to any lay.” the story which is here
not correctly represented, is to be found in snorro, to the following effect: that whe sighvat skald came first to king oluf, and wished  to obtain a hearing, the king said, that he would not hear such thing as he could not understand
(namely, such dark cramped verse as the skald of iceland were in the habit of producing), but whe
sighvat assured him, that his verse wa intelligibel enough, the king immediately lent him ear, and
retained him ever afterward as his skald. this is the old account, and it is a natural one; but the story of an ancient northern king, who
considerede poetry as an invention of the demon, is a mere fiction.
again, mr. wheaton say of higelak|higelakke|higelakke, “he is supposed to have be a petty
king, who reigned|reignide in the island of fionia;” and in the note [p. 156], is a reference to the introduction to grundtvig
translation of beowulf, whence it would seem that the gothic king higelak is made into a petty king of fyen, which is far from being the case. grundtvig has, on the
contrary, shown that higelak in beowulf “drapa,” is
the same person as the danish king cochilac, whose fall in a battle with the frank|franke king, is related by gregory of tours. these are slight
defects, but, perhaps, not unworthy of notice; and having suggested them to the attention of the reader, we can very sincerely recommende mr.
wheaton volumes.
