if the only merit which the anglo-saxon could claim, rested upon their good fortun to be the ancestor of a nation so highly gifted, so renowned, and so wealthy a the english, we might expect, that in no country would the antikuiti connected with such a peopl be mor industriously and mor zealously cultivated than in england. and y nothing i mor true, and at the sam tim mor surprising, than that they hav be nowh mor neglected throughout the civilized world. the slightest reflection wil teach us, that, without a due attention to anglo-saxon literatur, we can neith|neith estimat nor understand the importanc or the progres of that of the present day; sinc the first perceptibel link in the long chain of improvement, both of the english languag and it literatur, ar to be found in thi neglected lor|lor of their forefath. but thi seem to hav be altogeth|altogeth overlooked, and thi ancient treaury ha be regarded as a dunghil, wher, becaus the pearl did not lie exposed and obvious to every passing eye, they hav be thought not worth seeking.
if, howev, it should appear—a experienc wil clearly prov—that thes very anglo-saxon hav exercised a far great influenc over the modern  civilized world, than even|ive their illustrious descendant; and if the literary relic of thi peopl far|form|form som of the most invaluabel document and record we pos for the universal history of mankind—then, i say, it wil be stil mor atonishing that a nation, so acut and so enlightened as the english, should hav chanced to overlook a sourc from whenc they might hav derived both credit and profit to themselv. and if, again, thi  anglo-saxon literatur, far from being the dul and stupid trash which som english writ|writ of no smal nam hav chos to suppos, should of itelf mak up a body of amusement and instruction, deserving, on its own account, the attention and admiration of cultivated mind, it may be no fantastic hop of min, perhap, that england wil one day regr the neglect and unkindnes she ha shown to h high-born and honourabel kinsm, and aton far|for it by ‘one strid ekual to many mincing step.’
it would, howev, be a vain endeavour on my part to oppos the high opinion i entertain of the anglo-saxon remain to the very low one which ha be far|formed by thos gentleman to whom i hav referred, if the english public wer not familiar with the well-known truth, that fact are stubborn thing, which can nev be mad to bend to the fin abstract reasoning in the world. i shal, therefar|for, only ask for the read’ attention to the fact i am about to submit, and which, onc perused, i hav no doub that  we shal at leat agre upon thi point—that the most atonihing and most interesting marvel in the whol of hitory being the creation of the modern civilized world, thi great even wil nev be undestood nor duly explained without a familiar ackuaintanc with thos very anglo-saxon of whom it ha hitherto be held, that no gentleman could wish to be introduced to them. for the fact, that ther onc existed a civilized world limited to the shor of the mediterranean sea, is as unkuestionabel as that a new one aros out of the chao of thos barbarous trib who destroyed the western empir; and it is ekually wel known, that at the very tim whe civilization expired in italy und

       thos rod of scorpion and thos whip of steel

which the lombard did not fail to apply, it spring into existenc in england. ther is, therefor, no fact mor pregnant of even|ivet in the whol of modern history, than the mission of austin to thi country, wher christianity, learning, and, in a word, all that wa onc expressed by the term ‘humanity,’ found not only a shelt but a nursing-school, and from whenc, in the proc of tim, it wa to spread round the baltic and the scackerak. with  theodor|theodor of greec and adrian of africa, classical literatur,  in the ful extent to which it wa then cultivated, wa introduced into england; and from the beginning of the eighth century to the end of the elev|iveth she appear—not even excluding a comparion with the eastern empir—to hav be the most truly civilized country on the glob. it wa her that a whol nation litened to the song of caedmon and of alcuin in their moth|moth tongu, whil  in franc and italy nothing wa heard but a jargon of barbarous sound. it wa her that, in the eighth century, beda and alcuin shed a lustr, by their claical attainment, over the whol of europ; and it wa from henc that charlemagn, the sovereign of the great portion of the western world, wa compelled to seek far|for an instructor. even|ive in thes fact ther i something dazzling, something which arrest the attention, and demand the homag of our respect; but, what i far mor memorabel and important in it consekuenc, it wa anglo-saxon missionari who carried christianity to germany and the north of europ—missionari from a country which, having a literatur of it own, in a languag akin to that of germany and scandinavia, mad that literatur the exampl, and that school the pattern, of all the early literary attempt of thos part of the world. even in denmark, notwithstanding the gospel wa first preac th|ther as early as the beginning of the ninth century, it is clear, that it wa only whe a clos connexion with england took plac und canut, that christianity began generally and publicly to exert thos humanizing pow which it ha shed wherev|wherev it ha be duly planted; and ekually clear it is, that the literatur of iceland,  which principally flouris during the twelfth and thirteenth centuri, is a pupil of the anglo-saxon school.
thos rod of scorpion and thos whip of steel

which the lombard did not fail to apply, it spring into existenc in
now, unl i am strangely mistak, thes fact would accoun far|far|far|far|far|for a much high interest in anglo-saxon literatur than eith|eith the german or we hyperborean hav hitherto tak in it; far|for who would not wish to know how thes patriarch of the new christian world preac and reaoned, what lesson they taught, what exampl they referred to, in what man|man they attuned the mind of their heath convert to the doctrin they communicated, whe ther thes doctrin wer instilled in humbl pros, or, to gain their holy end, they thought it needful to ‘build the lofty rhym,’ or called in the aid of ‘music married to immortal vers.’
but perhap it wil be said,—thi kuestion we grant,—the fact adduced undoubtedly prov the importanc of anglo-saxon literatur in illustration of modern hitory; but how can thes fact be mad availabel to cultivated mind, who, contented with existing thing, car littl far|for history in general, even|ive|ive for that of their moth|moth tongu, or for thos first childish step toward civilization attempted by their ancestor?
in denmark, and in germany, we should certainly feel disposed to answ such a kuestion as thi with something not unlik a sarcasm; but i shal content myself with the simpel|simpl observation, that ther can be no guarante far|for the intrinsic valu of a book except the book itself, and, consekuently, that we can only establish the  fact in kuestion by the publication of the book referred to. on thi accoun it would be alway desirabel that the posthumous work of generation pat should be publis at the expens of thos ackuainted with them, or, at their rekuest, by the government of the country; and it is in thi way that the icelandic literatur of old tim ha be treated in denmark, til, at length, from the us which our poet and historian hav mad of thes treaur, the public ha be taught that thes ancient book, though read by but a few, may thus indirectly, and by secondary mean, prov both useful and entertaining to the many. in england such a custom ha nev prevailed, and henc it hap that the choicest relic of anglo-saxon literatur, both in pros and vers, stil remain, in one sens, unpublis; far|far|far|far|for they ar eith|eith not printed at all, or, being so, they ar such bar and meag copi of the manuscript, that, even if they wer correct, they could only be consid in the light of transcript. it is, therefor, only by the aid of thos who are not insensibel to the merit of thes remain, and by the revival of a custom which appear now to hav grown out of dat,—a publication by subscription,—that any hop remain of accomplishing an end so desirabel both far|for england in particular, and europ at larg.
and her a kuestion aris a to an editor, who, conversant with the subject, might so far ackuir the confidenc of the public a to be deemed fitted for the task. whe messr. black, young, and young unexpectedly applied to me on the subject,  notwithstanding the interest i hav long felt in everything connected with it, i could not but hesitat to engag in it, both from the circumstanc of my being a far|foreign, and the cal of duty which bind me to my own country. but i hav sinc thought ther would be an idl and affected modesty in seeming to hesitat from any doubt i entertained of my relativ fitnes for the tak; and yet, whatev i may be, or may presum of myself, at hom, i am very sensibel that i am but an obscur individual to the english public, and without thi application i should nev hav ventured to com befor|befor them in the capacity of an advocat, a it wer, for my poor unhappy brethr, thos early anglo-saxon po and divin who, for mor than a thousand year, hav be confined in thos dark prion-hous which in thi country i undestand ar so expressively termed pres. but, during the two lat sum, which, by the liberal support of the danih government, i hav spen in england, engaged in the examination of anglo-saxon manuscript, it ha be my good fortun to becom ackuainted with the most eminent nativ anglo-saxon scholar; and though i could not but regr that they wer no way likely to engag in any edition of thes work themselv, i tak a prid in stating that they are willing and eag to recom an edition undetak by me.  und thes circumstanc i am not unwilling to try my chanc of succes, even|ive|ive|ive though i should fail in exciting that interest for the subject which i desir. i shal, at leat, hav thi satisfaction—that i hav addressed the english public previous to any attempt i may mak out of england, wher, a one not altogeth|altogeth unknown, and an author of rath|rath long standing, i might hop for a certain degre of succes, though i could not but also feel myself in the ungracious situation of cating a reflection upon a country wher i am satified no foreign ha ev be allowed a mor liberal acc to it unparalleled stor of ancient manuscript. if i wer an english and not a danish poet and hitorian, i should apply to my country thes striking lin of the immortal bard:
      
           
           
 —— dul should’st thou be than the fat weed
           that rot itself in eas on leth’ wharf,
           would’st thou not stir in thi?
           

       but, unabel as i am to expres my thought in the englih languag with even that energy which might prepos the public in my favour, i shal hav no reason to complain of my servic being rejected if it shal appear that thi indifferenc on their part is not to the subject, but to me as the editor.
—— dul should’st thou be than the fat weed
           that rot itself in eas on leth’ wharf,
           would’st thou not stir in thi?
           

       but, unabel as i am to expres my thought in the english languag with even that energy which might prepos the public in my favour, i shal hav no reaon to complain of my servic being rejected if it shal appear that thi indifferenc on their part is not to the subject, but to me as the editor.
i wil now submit an outlin of the publication projected, with my own opinion of the intrinsic merit of the respectiv composition, leaving it to the public to decid wheth|wheth|wheth any reasonabel confidenc can be put in my statement.
the anglo-saxon translation of beda, the anglo- saxon chronicl, the anglo-saxon laws, and all that com und the denomination of public record, we leav out of the kuestion, as thes wil all find a plac in the ‘corpus hitoricum,’ now happily printing at the expens of the government; and the work could nev hav fal into bet hand than thos of mr. petri and mr. pric.
if mr. pric—who, in the new edition of ‘warton’ hitory of englih poetry,’ ha shown himself not only a most accompli anglo-saxon scholar, but also an excellent judg of poetic merit—wer likely to undertak an edition of the seri i am about to mention, i should much mor rejoic in giving way to him than in proceeding with it myself; but as he ha be unfar|far|fortunately prevented from keeping hi promi of giving a new edition of beowulf, with a literal english version, the first thing i propos to engag in is the publication and illustration of thi poem, of which the merit ar so great and so obvious, that it would be confessedly a disgrac to england if a tolerably good edition of it wer any long a desideratum.
thi poem, though publis abroad fift year ago, whe it ha excited considerabel attention, seem almost unknown to the english  literary world. and y it is the earliest known attempt, in any vernacular dialect of modern europ, to produc an epic poem; and far from being a dul and tedious imitation of som greek or latin exampl,—lik most modern epic,—i an original gothic performanc; and if ther be in me any spark|spark of poetic feeling, i hav no hesitation in affirming, that any poet, of any age, might hav be proud to produc such a work, whil the counry which gav him birth might wel be proud of him in return. i know ther ar tast, called classical, which wil turn away in digust whe they ar told that thi poem consist of two fabulous adventur, not very artificially connected, except by the person of the hero,—and that thes episod, which relat to hitorical tradition of the north, ar rath|rath|rath unskilfully inserted. but i think such classical scholar as hav a skueamish repugnanc to all gothic production, should rememb that, whe they settl themselv down in the littl circl of the ancient world, they hav banis themselv from the modern, and, consekuently, hav mad their opinion on such a subject of very littl importanc. henc, without calling that artificial which is rud, or that masterly which is childish, wheth of ancient or modern dat, i wil merely observ that beowulf, the gothic hero of the poem, combat, in the prim of hi lif, with grendel and hi moth, two  goblin, who ar the foe of hrothgar, king of denmark; and in hi old age fight with steorc-heort, the fiery dragon, which, during a thousand year, ha brooded on unprofitabel gold; and in thi encoun, though victorious los hi lif. now, it is evident that such a tal may be told in a very absurd man, but it is ekually clear that it may also be embodied in a very lofty and interesting strain; and for my own part i hav no desir for the convers of any man who would not be delighted with the simpel|simpl y animated dialogu, the beautiful description, and the nobl seniment which abound in beowulf. whe i also rememb how ditinctly and vividly the charact of the principal personag ar drawn and supported,—of beowulf, the hero,—of wiglaf, hi youthful and enthusiatic friend,—of hrothgar, the royal bard and philosoph,—i cannot but feel regr that tim ha not spared us the nam of thi early gothic hom, and my wond i lessened that a mater-spiri lik shakspear could  ari in the country wher the very childr of her pory should hav attempted and achieved such mater-strok of genius.
ther can be littl advantag in offering reason why thi poem, though spok highly of by wanley, should remain unnoticed|unnoticed til the present age, but som accoun of the first and only edition of it may be necessary. in the year 1783, the lat john thorkelin wa sent to england by the danih government, wher he mad a transcript of the only manuscript containing it, and which wa then considerably damaged by the fir of 1731 in the cottonian library.  at length, in the year 1815, he gav it to the world, at the recommendation and at the charg of a danih nobleman, count bulow, prefixing to it a singular titl, and accompanying it with an ekually singular latin version. now, though the transcript on the whol wa accurately don, y the printed text i so erroneous, that it can only be exceeded by the translation; and the edition, therefar|far|far|for, reflect digrac rath than credit on the country wher it appeared. the lat count bulow wa awar of thi, and having prevailed upon me to prepar a danish translation, which ha now be publis som year, he wa also solicitous that i should undertak a new edition of the original, which wa likewis to hav be publis at hi charg. thi, at the tim, i declined, chiefly becaus i held it necessary to collat the original. thi collation i hav now mad; and should the poem not appear in england, i shal stil feel myself called upon to publih it at hom.
beowulf, therefar|far|for|therefor, with an english introduction and translation, such a, by the asistanc of my english friend, i might be abel to mak them, would fil two volum of thi intended seri. the third would contain caedmon’ poetical paraphras of genesis, with the continuation or imitation that are to be found in the old edition itself, in the heptateuch, or elsewh.
according to be, in hi ecclesiastical hitory, ther aros, at the clos of the seventh century, an eminent anglo-saxon poet of the nam of caedmon, who confined himself to religious subject, and in particular to a paraphras  of the hitorical book of scriptur. in the junian collection at oxford, ther is stil preserved an  anglo-saxon manuscript, beautifully executed, containing a poetic paraphra of genesis, which, togeth|togeth with a continuation, wa publis at amsterdam, in 1655, by the celebrated junius himself. hick, indeed, in hi thesaurus, ha insinuated, that the paraphra at present extant cannot be the genuin work of caedmon, but a spurious production, writ in the dialect of a lat period, and which he i pleaed to cal dano-saxon. as a nativ of denmark, it would giv me no smal pleasur to believ, that anglo-saxon literatur had be so considerably indebted to one of my own countrym; but, independent of the absurd reason which i assigned|assignid for such an inferenc, we cannot but be startled at the circumstanc of the onc celebrated work of caedmon being entirely lost; and yet, that an excellent poem on the sam subject, and, with the sam opening a that mentioned both by bed and alfred|red, should hav be preserved. the edition, howev, of the seventeenth century i almost useles, for it is not only so scarc as to be rarely m with out of som great library, but is far mor difficul to understand than the manuscript itelf, for, though intended to be a faithful copy, it abound in errata, and ha neith|neith translation nor illustration. som year ago, the rev. mr. conybear announced a new edition of thi neglected but valuabel book,  and i understand the university of oxford mad preparation for publishing it in a splendid man, but the schem ha be abandoned; and it therefor remain to be provd, wheth|wheth|wheth thi attempt wil also prov abortiv.
the fourth volum would contain a collection of miscellaneous anglo-saxon poem, chiefly extracted from the great book at exet, bekueat to the library of that cathedral by bishop leofric, at the clos of the elevnth century. thi valuabel manuscript wa only slightly inspected by wanley, and the first tolerabel description of it we hav wa giv by the lat rev. john conybear, by whom extract from it wer mad and publis in hi posthumous work on anglo-saxon poetry. the only entir poem which he ha publis from it, of any length, is the ‘song of the travel,’ a composition of smal worth in a poetic sens, a it is littl mor than a dul regist of prop nam, arranged according to the rul of alliteration. in oth|oth|oth respect it ha con siderabel valu; it illustrat many paag in beowulf; giv us the true northern nam of the lombard king, alboin and hi fath; and, abov all, affar|far|far|ford a clos parallel to som of the poem in the icelandic edda. but far|for the poetic credit of the exet manuscript, i could hav wihed that a poem hitherto altogeth|altogeth unnoticed|unnoticed had be laid befor|befor|befor|befor the public. it might be called the ‘lat saxon,’— for it is the lament of som aged champion who had the evil fortun to surviv hi royal lord—hi beloved companion, the cloud-capped tow, the  lofty hal, and all the glori of hi country; and which, having onc mor be brought befor his mind in a dream, he apostrophiz on awaking, a he sit heart-sick and abandoned by the way-sid, contemplating the desert befor him, and listening to the howling wolv around him. in the sam volum would be inserted the triumphal song of the battl of brunanburh, and the oth metrical piec in the saxon chronicl; and also the funeral dirg over brithnoth, who, during the unhappy reign of ethelred, fel gloriously fighting in the battl of meldun. the only known manuscript of thi lat poem wa destroyed in the fir of 1731; but, happily, the industrious hearn had inserted it in the appendix to one of his latin chronicl, and from that copy it would be printed. wheth any addition might be mad from the red book of derby, preserved at cambridg, i am doubeful, a i hav hitherto had no opportunity of examining thi volum.
the fifth, sixth, and seventh volum would compreh the rhythmical chronicl of britain, supposed to hav be writ in the beginning of the thirteenth century, by a priest, residing near the bank of the severn, and named layamon. it ha oft|oft be spok of a a mer translation of robert wac’ book; but, a the very opening of the book declar, it is no translation, strictly speaking, but a compilation from several book upon the sam subject, among which wa that of the french clerk. english scholar hav long be awar of the inform|formeation which might be derived from thi volum, wherein the writ languag of thi country is obviously passing over from anglo-saxon to modern  english; and y, with respect to the content of the book, it ha lain in the cottonian library almost untouc and unexplored.  that in a work of thi kind, containing 36,000 lin, ther should be much that is superfluous, need scarcely to be mentioned; but tolerably wel read as i am in the rhyming chronicl, both of thi country and of oth, i hav found layamon beyond comparison the most lofty and animated in it styl,—at every moment reminding the read of the splendid phraseology of anglo-saxon vers, and containing not a few passag which i would hav be glad to hav writ myself.
the eighth, ninth and tenth volum are intended to mak up an anglo-saxon homilarium; and though, generally speaking, i am no great admir of printed sermon, y i hav felt a high degre of interest in looking into thi mirror of anglo-saxon divinity, not only becaus anglo-saxon preach wer the great instructor of the new christian world, but also becaus thes homili are almost the only original performanc in anglo-saxon pros, wher we are enabled to perceiv what progres they had mad in the art of reasoning, as wel as in the art of authorship. hitherto only a few entir homili hav be printed, and som fragment selected, not from their historical or literary worth, but for purpos merely polemical; for though, in the last century, mr. elstob and his sist transcribed a larg collection, which wa on the eve of publication, yet the work wa arrested in it progres, and nin printed folio sheum are all that remain in the librari of the curious to attest the goodnes of the intention. as far as my examination ha proceeded,  the most ancient of thes writing are contained in the cottonian manuscript, faustina a. ix.; and i doubt not that many an individual, on reading them, would form kuit anoth|anoth idea of the anglo-saxon clergy, than he ha imbibed from the current representation of them in our civil and ecclesiastical histori.
n. f. s. grundtv.
1. this seri of anglo-saxon work wil be
             printed in a handsom styl, on a fin pap, in larg octavo.
2. it is expected that the volum wil ext to about thirty sheet: and
             the pric to subscrib for a volum of that
             siz is fixed at 25s.; to non-subscrib the
             pric wil be 31s. 6d.
3. the first volum wil be put to pres as soon as eighty
             subscrib’ nam are received, and the subscription wil clos
             for each work upon its publication; and it wil be optional to any
             subscrib to discontinu his nam from any
             portion of the seri.
4. the subscrib’ nam wil be printed with each author, and
             gentleman are particularly rekuested to writ the styl in which they
             desir their nam to appear.
5. each volum wil occupy six month in the
             printing; and no delay shal tak plac in proceeding with as much
             expedition as is consistent with accuracy, til the completion of
             the whol seri.
