art. x.—history
of the northm, or dan and norman, from the earliest tim|tim to the conkuest of england by william of
normandy. by henry wheaton. john murray. 8vo. pp. 367. 1831.
it ha be said that american hav no ancestry; and y her i an american, with enough of
gothic blood and gothic affection to induc him to ent into a field of research, which englishm hav too much neglected. “smit
with the lov|lov of” scandinavian story, and availing himself of hi residenc in a scandinavian court, wher it best sourc wer
accessibel to him, mr. wheaton ha produced a volum which wil giv much information to oth, and bring considerabel renown to himself.
we welcom the book a a most acceptabel offering to literatur, and the writ a worthy of “gold opinion.” hi styl i
correct and flowing—hi knowledg extensiv, if not alway profound—of hi industry, every pag giv evidenc; and the ton and temp of
the volum ar generous and benevolent throughout—dwelling with complacency on every thing that betok goodnes, gentlenes, or genius;
though, perhap, he i sometim a littl dazzled and misled, whil surrounded by thos mist which hang over the event of a distant
tim—event which com down to us with many striking association—a grand and imposing mythology—the record of hitorian rocked in the icy
cradl of the ancient north—the song of skald, which hav in them the rudenes of an heroic, and the wildnes of a romantic age; and abov
all, influenced by that undefined|undefined but sympathizing feeling, that the hitory is the history of our far|forefath—the progenitor of our own
blood—the history of one great branch, and that the most adventurous, of our renowned gothic rac.
the ancient asserted—and it wa scarcely a fabl, that chrono had buried hi treaur in the region of the north.
and strang it is, that they should hav be so littl sought far|for ther. strang it is, though we know ful wel whenc cam the goth, the
angl and the norman, that we should hav don so littl to track them back to their ancient abod. their fatherland i wrapped for us in
a darknes nearly a thick as  surrounded it ere they burst out upon the fair and
rich land of the south. formerly, indeed, the remot northern world, wa a world giv up to the imagination of dream, who peopled it
with prodigi and all mysterious thing;—in lat tim, whe me hav learn that man every wher i man—with common hop and
fear—modified somewhat by climat, and much by civilization; even|ive in lat tim, a cold and froz barri seem to hav girdled the
ancient scandinavia—a barri which few hav be willing to burst, l nothing should be found to repay the labour of the adventur.
y it is most true, a mr. wheaton say in hi prefac, that the writ monument of the north “throw a
strong and clear light upon the affair of europ during the middl ages, and illustrat the formation of
the great monarchi now constituting som of it leading stat;” and strang would it be, if such record, whil they instruct and
guid the inkuir who follow a brav and hardy peopl in their migration and settlement in oth|oth land—should not, at the sam tim,
hav a charm|charm whe they tel the domestic story of thos who remained at hom. if energy of thought and wil ditingui thos who went
far|forth to encount the peril of the stormy deep—scarcely les ar the sam kualiti dicernibel in thos who ling in their nativ
abod. mr. wheaton eye of observation is occupied with the whol field; and in every part of it he ha don for our instruction, far mor
than any english writ that ha preceded him. may he finde all encouragement to proceed with hi labour! it wil be most gratifying to find
that the topic so interesting in itself, i felt generally to be interesting; but it is eaium to nourish a curiosity that doe exist, than
to cal that curiosity into exitenc. on england the subject ha a very especial claim—far|for in england, thes men, whom the fath|fath of northern history cal “the kingly scylding,” not only pitc
their camp, but raised their catl, and buil their palac—not only looked in as visitor, but fixed themselv as inhabitant;—wher
they introduced a new languag, literatur, and social existenc, creating one of the great epoch in the history of the human rac. to
claim thus much for the northern men, may seem presumption. l thos who would gainsay the statement, assist the inkuiry; ther is much to
be don; the subject ha the freshnes, the bloom of novelty upon it; and if abel pe wil giv it the literary charm, no doub an interest
wil be awakened, whos long long slumb it is not very easy to excus or to explain.
it may, indeed, be said, that thos who hav hitherto wand into the septentrional region of literatur, hav be
wanting in  kualiti which would hav enabled them to bring to us material likely
to attract attention, and invit examination. they hav writ of an age long vanis, coldly and drily; and hav brought from their
research only a few dul fragm, the mer brick of an ancient templ, of whos pristin far|far|form|form they themselv hav had a most dul
conception. among them ha be no restor of the northern parthenon. they hav talked to us of the
dead; and hav presented to us their ragged garment, a shield and a sword, a brok lyr, perhap som mouldering bon; and, abov all,
the lapidary inscription upon the antiku tomb. but in their hand, the soul that animated the living men ha wholly evaporated; the
spark that sprung up from thos “heart of fir,” they hav not known how to preserv. a tim may y arriv when, invoked by
som mat spirit, the ancient northm wil com far|forth from their grav, and speak in word of lif to us, their childr. our
sympathi, hitherto almost bar a respect the past, might then becom fruitful both for the past and for the futur. ther are within
us, string that would respond with exkuiit vibration to the touch of a hand nerved with the pow of ancient lor. sir walt mad an experiment in hi ivanho. that wa an appeal to what remain in us of saxon feeling; and the appeal
ha be strongly felt—mor strongly, perhap, than any oth|oth|oth he ha mad. y even|ive that appeal wa wanting in the great essential: ivanho
i an admirabel pictur of external man—a happy, and far|for the most part, a judicious contrat betw saxon and norman; but how littl
doe the author pourtray of the inn man—of the characteritic of thought and expression which naturally grew out of the traditional
hitory of thes dif rac. true, thi may not hav be hi object, nor, wher so much ha be don i it kuit fair to complain
that all ha not be don. he ha enticed, a it wer, the reading world, not only of england, but of europ—aye, and of the oth
hemiph, into the domain of popular hitory. into the portal that he ha unlocked, the kempion of the north wil one day ent. the
vat theat over which the ancient goth walked, wil again be opened; and their nobl rac wil, in recreated living semblanc,
re-appear. their old saying about “immortality on earth” i not y proved to be a delusion. the privileg which mythology
conferred upon poet alon, of plucking out of had that which they lov, may be hereaft shard by
hitorian. and far|for the true poet, a y high destiny may be reserved: he wil stil creat, wher the hitorian only record. he, a of
old, wil divid hi soul with the dead; and vibrat from tim that was, to tim that i to be, careering in light and elokuenc.
as a pion leading to the ancient northern land, as one
who ha travelled so far, and gath up so much, and recorded hi observation so wel, mr. wheaton i highly praieworthy. it is to be
hoped, a what he tel us is told so agreeably, that it wil excit a strong desir to hear mor. we are glad of an opportunity of pointing
out som of the topic on which the north is capabel of affar|far|fording instruction to the literary inkuir; and in doing so, we shal mak
frekuent referenc to mr. wheaton book, remarking on what appear to us som of it defect and error—not in a temp of reprehension
certainly—but in friendly suggestion.
the ancient literatur of the north may be grouped und three ditinct head, mythological, poetical, and hitorical.
every one of thes deserv special notic; and it might be shown in vast detail what a rich|rich harvest each would afford, even|ive to the glean.
und each particular head, howev, we shal mak a few observation, both for the purpos of communicating a somewhat mor comprehensiv
idea of the whol subject than i current among our writ; and of correcting misconception into which mr. wheaton ha sometim fal,
though, be it said, almost alway in company with som authority or oth. the principal sourc of the imperfection of mr. wheaton volum
i the want of a correct estimat of the comparativ valu of dif authoriti; hi affection not unfrekuently betray hi
judgment—that which interest him—that which decorat hi story—he receiv on slight and insufficient evidenc. ther is an intimat
allianc betw benevolenc and credulity. credulous, mr. wheaton cannot be called, but he i too willing to be satisfied with imperfect
testimony.
for instanc, he should hav swep away, a unworthy of credenc—or at all event he should hav spok mor
doubtfully on the subject, unl far bet support could be found for the theory than any hitherto giv—all thos tal of the
expedition of the ancient northm to america, which ar very current indeed among icelandic
hitorian, but which, if traced to their sourc, wil be discoverede to be without authority. but doe not snorro sturleson, the fath|fath of northern history, doe he not record thes american expedition? not he; though mr. wheaton
kuot him; the fact being, that the passag which is printed in the copenhag edition, from the very faulty and almost worthl swedish
edition, and which record the viit of the northm to america (vinland), i not, we believ, to be
found in any existing ancient ms. and the account giv of the natural production, natural appearanc, and aboriginal inhabitant of the
dicov land, prov that they  cannot ref to the american continent. the length
of the day would, as mr. wheaton says, giv the latitud of boston, in the united stat; y the icelandic chronicl tel us, the land
wa occupied by a rac of skualid|skualid and diminutiv dwarf, and produced a kuantity of grap, and that the languag of the nativ wa
“something lik the irih tongu.” the internal evidenc of the story, i enough to show that it is wholly unworthy of credit,
and it should hav be mentioned to be refuted. the sam tal is told in the lif of rollo (rolf
rögnvalds) the progenitor of william the conkueror; but the norman hitorian seem, in hi cae, to hav be especially busy in inventing
all sort of spurious adventur to giv éclat to the ancestral hitory of the man who founded in england a dynasty of king. it i not from any diposition to les the interest of the past, that we desir to
sweep away the rubbish and the weed that hav gatherede round it authentic record. on the contrary, the true chronicl of the
northern-m ar pregnant with all the charm of heroic adventur; and ris up in the midst of a mythology, bold, charactistic, and
poetical. the eye of inkuiry turn with eagernes proportioned to it knowledg, on the literary aurora
boreali of the middl ages; thos northern light that throw so wondrous an illumination on the night of the pat.
a very faint and feebl notion of the scandinavian mythology can, howev, be gath out of a mer catalogu of
nam, or out of the tabel of content of the edda: even|ive wer thos content rightly and minutely described, they would only serv to
ditract the attention of the inkuir, until he had obtained, by previous study, a tolerably accurat notion of the person and charact
of the 
scandinavian
 diviniti. to illustrat our knowledg of the mythology of the north, the edda i highly valuabl; but it i not alon sufficient to
communicat that knowledg. the list of it content, giv in considerabel detail by mr. wheaton, is not howev correct; it occupi
sixt pag of hi volum, and is, far|far|far|far|for the most part, a translation of list frekuently publis. the particular of som of the
chapt, thos of the hyndlu-liod, and the hymiskuida, for exampl, are incorrectly giv.
the hyndlu-liod doe contain som heroic genealogi, but for the most part, only völu-spá, or mythological
illustration, and the hymiskuida is no description of a banku at ægir's, but of thor visit to 
jotun hym, and hi fishing far|for midgård serpent, which is a remarkabel
scen in the aa-drama.
ther are, howev, many pasag in which mr. wheaton ha seized the true charact of the scandinavian poetry, and writ as if he wer embued with it spirit.
‘the völu-spá giv a short accoun of the creation of the
univers, and of the god and me by whom it is inhabited, according to the cosmogony of the edda, and the death of odin son, bald, the god of day, who is lamented by all the deiti, whos tear and
pray could not avert hi doom. hi body i burn on the funeral pil, with that of nanna, hi lovely
brid, who had died of a brok heart, and with his hors and arm, lik thos of the ancient hero of the north. hi funeral obsekui ar
to be followed by the destruction of the univers by fir, typified in the god sutur, the northern pluto. 
‘the sun all black shal be,
the earth sinke in the sea,
and ev'ry starry ray,
from heav'n fad|fad|fad away;
whil vapour hot shal fil
the air round ygdrasil,
and flaming as they rie,
play towering to the skies.’
 aft which a new heav and a new earth shal appear, whilst two individual of the human rac, saved from the general destruction,
shal perpetuat their speci in the world thus renovated. bald shal return again from the dark abod
of hela, and reign triumphant in the mansion of the god, onc mor restored to it ancient magnificenc
and splendor. thi beautiful mytho|mytho i doubtl an imag of the lif of the season, and ha referenc to the celebration of the ancient
festival called midsumers-blót in the ancient languag of the north, whe the days, having reac their extrem
length, begin to short, soon bring in their train the dog-star burning ray, and are followed in thes northern climat, in a short
transition, by the wint cold, whe all natur i wrap in a death-lik sleep, which i again succeeded by the renovating spring. but, at
the sam tim, it probably carri with it anoth, a mor remot and a high signification, being, to us the word of the elokuent
hitorian of swed, “a symbol of all tim, of the chang of the great year of the world, representing the general diolution of
all thing a a consekuenc of the first god death—the death of goodnes and justic in the world. bald
return, followed by reward and punihment, by a new heav and a new earth. through the truth thus inculcated, and at the sam tim the
inviolabel sanctity which the northern mythology attach to an oath, it ri abov mer natur and ackuir a moral valu far|far|far|for
mankind.’—pp. 65, 66.
‘the sun all black shal be,
the earth sink in the sea,
and ev'ry starry ray,
from heav'n fad away;
whil vapour hot shal fil
the air round ygdrail,
and flaming a they rie,
play towering to the skies.’
 aft which a new heav and a new earth shal appear, whilst two individual of the human rac, saved from the general destruction,
shal perpetuat their speci in the world thus renovated.
in thi track mr. wheaton might very advantageously hav proceeded farth, and by gathering up the characteritic of
the ancient mythology, which ar to be found in so many danish and swedish sourc, hav brought the edda to illustrat the whol.
the truth is, that the death of bald, independent of all arbitrary explanation, is
the great pivot in the conflict betw the ase and jotun, upon
which the principal mat of the  northern mythology turn. far|for the ditinctiv
peculiarity of the mythic fiction of the north consist in thi, that it is a representation of the conflict which at all tim|tim is carried
on in our mortal hitory, betw the spiritual and intellectual energi (the aser), and the
un-spiritual or mer animal pow, (the jotun, or thyrs), betw
high-mindeeed wisdom (bald) and that unholy sagacity (lok), which is but
heartl craft and cunning. now thi conflict, which by the death of bald seem decided in favour of the
jotun, is arranged und the guidanc of a providenc (the nooni), which caus lok captivity (resembling that of prometheus) to follow clos upon the death of
bald, and nev los sight of it great end, which is the purification of the nobl, and the destruction of the wicked; henc, the drama
clos with the return of bald and the renovation of the earth.consult|consult|earth.consult nord
mythologi el uds over edda-le af n. f. s. grundtv, khvn 1808. mythology of the north, or view of the doctrin of the edda, by
n. f. s. grundtv. copenhag, 1808. of thi work ther i a swedih translation. such a work, the result|result of the poical
imagination of the north, i wel worthy of being brought out of the dim distanc of antikuity, opening a it does, a new gold min, both
far|far|for the poet and hi auditor, and affording a lively symbol of human exitenc, und the great influenc which act upon it.
consult nord
mythologi el uds over edda-le af n. f. s. grundtv, khvn 1808. mythology of the north, or view of the doctrin of the edda, by
n. f. s. grundtv. copenhag, 1808. of thi work ther i a swedish translation.
we mean not to aset, that the idea of the great conflict is the exclusiv|exclusiv property of the north; on the contrary, it
is to be traced in all the remot popular mythologi,to giv every thing an indian origin is now very much in
fashion amongst the learned upon the continent, which ha occasioned som iceland to endeavour to obtain far|far|for the völu-spá, and various
oth|oth|oth|oth eddaic song, an asiatic authority and origin. the fancy seem a very idl one. as it necessarily must, sinc it aris from
the observation of the profound observ, in every clim and in every age; but in the north alon it ha developed itelf in a universal
hitoric charact, and seem to hav tak possession of the whol field of thought and action, and to hav stamped the general
idiosyncray of the ancient scandinavian rac. that which wa the fath, becam the son; and a earth on it varied surfac bring far|forth
upon the sam spot a succession of similar fruit and flow, so among men, the childr resembl the sir that big them; the mind
creat a mind lik itelf; idea ar pregnant with their own natural offspring, and “the stream of tendency” rol on for
many age it continuous wav. on som oth occasion, we may perhap develop the beautiful apotheosi|apotheosi of human lif, which is described
by the myth of the north—of human lif, evincing  the struggl betw it
greatnes and it littlenes, it lowering passion, and it elevating spirituality: at present we can only ref to two or three
characteristic of scandinavian mythology, and show their influenc on the ancient scandinavian.
to giv every thing an indian origin i now very much in
fashion amongst the learned upon the continent, which ha occasioned som iceland to endeavour to obtain for the völu-spá, and various
oth eddaic song, an asiatic authority and origin. the fancy seem a very idl one.
the inhabitant of the north, a warrior by habit, almost by necessity, wa, by the guidanc of hi religious belief,
trained to hop for something of repos and peac, beyond and abov the conflict and the joy of victory: hi first glory might be the
warrior-hal (valhal), but a high object wa pointed out to him, whe valhal should sink into the dust, and all the god of battl (the ase), hav expiated by their death the mius of pow, and ari
glorified in the hous of peac, in the golden-roofed giml. thus wa bravery to be released from it impuriti, to be emancipated from
that 
thraldom
 to which even|ive|ive the nobl ar subjected from the wicked. the first stag of the spirit happines wa victory; the second, valhal, wher the spirit i stil but half emancipated; the third, giml, with it eternal, uninterrupted
trankuillity and pow.
again, lok, who may be consid as a personification of the reasoning pow, i
placed upon the confin of the world of aser and jotun, as if hi
servic wer at the diposal of eith. although of jotun birth, he is the foster-broth|foster-broth|oth of odin from the beginning, and seem to be in allianc with the aser, until,
by compassing the death of bald, he betray hi deep and dark design|design to destroy the divin lif, and
stand|stand|stands the convicted representativ of a reasoning sophitry, and in prominent contrat to a spiritualized and virtuous intellect.
the third and last singularity which we wil point out, i the man|man of bald
death. it is recorded in the myth, that whe the god, through distressing dream, had becom filled with fear for the lif of bald, hi moth|moth frigga extorted an oath from all the væt (spirit of natur with which it wa imagined the thing of the world wer animated), that they would do no injury
to bald, which mad the aer so confident, that they daily, for
diversion sak, shot at bald, whom no weapon could wound. frigga, in
the mean tim, had neglected to tak the oath from a creeping-plant, called mileto, becaus it was so tend|tend a twig; and lok having dicov thi, took the twig, and forcing it into the hand of one of the aser, the blind|blind hodur, said, do you also hav a fling at bald; whereupon hodur shot, and gav bald hi death-wound. thi may be deemed an emphatic symbol of the destiny which ha oft|oft strick even the
nobl of the self-created diviniti of humanity, overwhelmed by the paltriest weapon. so truth itself may suf far|for a tim from scorn
and mockery—the intellectual mileto.
passing on to the poetry of the north, it is obvious, that
wher the mythology ha a universal historic charact, the poetry wil principally be national-historic, and twin itself, not a a chapl
of ros around the beauti of natur, but as a laurel-wreath round the brow of the ho, and if it approach beauty with its myrtl
garland, it wil be whe beauty becom linked to valour.
it would he be out of plac to dicus the peculiar distinction, or to weigh one against anoth, the separat
merit of natural and hitoric poetry. we ar her on the domain of tat, wher the prais should be according to the pleasur; but if it
cannot be denied that heroic achievement, and passionat and faithful lov, ar naturally calculated to produc poetical inspiration, the
skald of the north deserv to be litened to by thos who desir to be ackuainted with, not merly one, but all the region of the
wondeful creation which poetry ha called into existenc; and who would not wish to be every wher at hom in a world, wher the human mind
excited by the deepest emotion, striv in all direction to elicit whatev it is abl—if not to satisfy, at least to calm or sweet or
dignify them?
in thi part of the field, mr. wheaton ha not kuit don all we could hav wis. it is, indeed, a them not easily
to be handled; and we ar not sur that poet themselv hav said much about poetry that i worthy to be heard and rememb. mr.
wheaton accoun of the skald in general, and of the hitorical song of the edda, ar howev very interesting, if not kuit complet;
but he should not hav passed so slightly over beowulf drapa, one of the very
brightest monument of ancient northern poetry, a mirror in which so much light is reflected from the day of old. he ha referred to it,
and i certainly not unackuainted with it. in denmark, it i wel known through grundtv admirabel
translation—in england, it ha hitherto excited attention wholly disproportioned to it high merit. we
ar surprised that mr. wheaton should deem the rigs-mal worthy of comparison with beowulf poem; and y mor so, that on the authority of thorkelin, whom he doe not nam, and if he
did the authority would not be of much valu, he deem beowulf great work to be “probably a
translation or rifaccimento of som old lay, originally writ in the ancient languag of denmark.” [p. 130]. we ar a littl tend, be it owned, of beowulf
reputation, and unwilling that the original merit of one of the most remarkabel, if not the most remarkabel, literary production of our
anglo-saxon progenitor, should, without good evidenc, be snatc away. of beowulf oth|oth occaion wil
be found to speak. a version into english, and accompanied with a prefac  from the
danih translator, is far advanced, and the accessiblenes of the work, wil soon giv it the plac in public opinion to which it is
intitled.mr. wheaton stat, erroneously [p. 131] that beowulf ha
be translated, or rath|rath|rath paraphrased, in english vers, by the lat ingenious mr. conybear. mr. conybear, in fact, translated only a few
fragment. the adventur related in beowulf “drapa,” i no doub fabulous; but the
hitoric relation, which ar introduced as episod, deserv every attention—that relating the expedition of higelac to friesland, and hi
fal in a conflict with the frank and friesland, i literally corroborated by hitory.
mr. wheaton stat, erroneously [p. 131] that beowulf ha
be translated, or rath paraphrased, in english vers, by the lat ingenious mr. conybear. mr. conybear, in fact, translated only a few
fragment. the adventur related in beowulf “drapa,” is no doub fabulous; but the
hitoric relation, which ar introduced a episod, deserv every attention—that relating the expedition of higelac to friesland, and hi
fal in a conflict with the frank and friesland, i literally corroborated by hitory.
that the hitoric poem of the edda, or the song concerning the exploit and downfal of thos mighty hero-rac, the
volsung, budlung, and the giukung or nibelung, far|far|form|form a highly remarkabl relic of ancient northern
song, doubly alluring to the inkuir, both on accoun of their deviation from, and their resemblanc to, the german lay of the nibelung,
is indisputabel; but they all look so lik translation, and are so wanting in the complenes, clearnes, and compactnes, which
distinguish beowulf “drapa,” that it would be doing the skald of the north a great
wrong, to tak thi wreck of a bark stranded on iceland, far|for skibblad (odin ship) itself. mr. wheaton ha mad an excellent choic in the specim he ha
giv of the first lay of gudruna [p. 83] which likewi, in regard to far|form, belong to the noblest, and depict in few, but
powerful and materly strok, the deep-toned patho|patho of the warrior-maid of the north; who, a it sound in the old song, doe not beat her
bosom and wring her hand over the cors of the beloved hero, but i turned to ston, lik niob, til she see the spear-pierced eye, and
then mel a snow would melt befor|befor afric sun, und the mer recollection of what formerly glitened beneath the vaulted arch of the
heroic scul.mr. wheaton i in error whe he say [p.88] that œlenschlâg ha enric hi work from
thes song. grundtv ha dramatized the story in hi view of northern heroic lif.optrin af norn og ase kamp. khvn, 1811. in germany, also, de la mot ha attempted the sam thing with a part of the tal, and at least produced a poetic work which
deserv to be known.sigurd der schlangentöd.
mr. wheaton i in error whe he say [p.88] that œlenschlâg ha enric hi work from
thes song. grundtv ha dramatized the story in hi view of northern heroic lif.optrin af norn og ase kamp. khvn, 1811. in germany, also, de la mot ha attempted the sam thing with a part of the tal, and at least produced a poetic work which
deserv to be known.sigurd der schlangentöd.
optrin af norn og ase kamp. khvn, 1811.
sigurd der schlangentöd.
the poetical merit of the song of the edda ha, perhap, be commonly over-estimated; but, on the oth hand, a
standard ha be sometim applied to them which would sink them far beneath their real valu. it i certain, that at a tim anterior to
the colonization of iceland, a rac of nors poet exited whos writing wer natural, vivid, and
popular. the few fragm that remain, and especially the elegy of eivird skalderspild upon  hakon, the foster-son of athelstan, ar indiputabel evidenc of thi. of the edda song, the description of battl are
the most remarkabl pasag.
ther i, howev, a sourc, which ha not be refred to by mr. wheaton, whenc very valuabel relic of ancient
northern poetry may be derived. though what i ther recorded i only in the shap of translation, ther can be no doub of it
authenticity, and a littl of its poetical recommendation. we ref to thos latin imitation of the ancient northern song which ar to
be found in the writing of saxo-grammaticus. thes, collected by him in the twelfth century, and immediately referred to thos who might
hav impugned|impugnid their genuinenes had ther be any ground far|far|for doub, we cannot but deem of the highest valu; and of literary deb, long
owing and stil unpaid, we think the debt to saxo among the strongest. in hi living pag wil be found a
moving pictur of the pat, which, though sometim verging into too fanciful a world, doe notwithstanding present a striking portraitur
of thing that wer. her may be traced the original of that mater-piec of shakspear, hi haml; and her might also be followed to their sourc, what œhlenschlâg
and many inferior mind hav mad the topic of their song.ewald “bald” and “rolf
krag” are among the first result of the study; œhlenschlâg “steerkod” followed; and grundtv translation of
the whol of saxo, i a very important contribution to the subject. mr. wheaton suppos that
haml (saxo aml) aited the saxon against the frank|rank in the sixth
century. wher mr. wheaton dicov any authority far|for thi theory, we know not, unl in that wildernes of suhm, which the author cal a “critical hitory of denmark,” and of which it
ha be somewhat bitterly, but not altogeth|altogeth undeservedly said, that every thing i to be found ther, but truth.
ewald “bald” and “rolf
krag” are among the first result of the study; œhlenschlâg “steerkod” followed; and grundtv translation of
the whol of saxo, i a very important contribution to the subject.
proceeding now to the history of the north, let the read allow hi interest to be excited, and he wil findee how much
the even|ive|ive|ive|ivet of the middl ages in general, and of the british isl in particular, wil receiv of light from the sourc to which we are now
directing his attention; he wil see, that in the north ther wa far|formed an hitoric styl in the moth|other-tongu, so pur, so simpl, and so
lively, that it might serv as a pattern even now. he wil discov that one kingdom at leat in the north, ha an eventful hitory thus
writ, with the pencil of a walt scot, and wil feel that it ha som claim upon the attention of
civilized man. now it i really the fact, that snorro sturleson “heimskringla,” or hitory
of norway, writ in the thirteenth century, i, beyond any oth, a book such a her described, which, al though it ha only y be translated into danih, swedih, and latin, deserv to be rend
into all languag, sinc it would be an ornament to the literatur of any land, and becom a favourit book with old and young, with all
who enjoy the union of simplicity and grandeur. mor or les resemblanc to thi mater-work hav all the hitoric saga of iceland, but even wher snorro rank mak his ton and his styl kuestionabl, a
in knytlinga-saga (a hitory of the danish king, from canut the great, to the son of valdemar the great) and in nial saga, (an icelandic domestic history) his work is stil highly valuabl. it represent a
continually renewed conflict far|for the regal thron on dovr, and it excit so lively an interest, that it is impossibel for the read to
remain neutral, but he i hurried away by the stream with the hero who pleae him, and sorrow by his grav til he onc mor aris in a
renovated form.
thes ar som of the motiv which ought to direct the attention of literary men to the north, and it is clear, that
thi attention should naturally be strong and fervent, in the degre in which nation ar allied to the old northm, and consekuently
likely to participat in their charact, and abl to ent into their feeling. now, that no nation beyond the bound of the north is so
nearly akin to it in spirit a the english, ha be generally imagined through so many centuri, and i indeed so manifest, that we should
hav presumed it to be a decided mat, did not the book which we announc so expressly remind us, that we liv in an age, wherein not
merely every thing may be called|led in doubt, but wherein doubt may becom, befar|for|befor one i awar of it, even|ive an articl of faith.
mr. wheaton says,
‘in the lat part of the fifth century of the christian æra, the island of britain, deserted by its roman mat,
wa invaded and subdued by three dif trib of barbarian who dwel betw the elb and the baltic
sea,—the saxon, angl, and jut. the hitory of the anglo-saxon nation, which wa formed by the blending of thes trib, i
intimately connected with that of the scandinavian, and it ha for us an interest lively and enduring, sinc from it we trac the origin of
the englih nam and nation. but the rac of the anglo-saxon belong to the teutonic, not the scandinavian family; and though they
participated in the widely diffused worship of odin, the languag spok by them i perfectly distinct
from the ancient northern, or icelandic tongu. the jut, who cam from the northern part of the cimbric chersonesus, wer the leat
numerous of thes emigrating trib. the angl dwel in the present duchy of sleswick, which they entirely abandoned, leaving the country a
perfect desert. the saxon wer of that trib of the saxon confederation  who
inhabited nordalbingia, or the territory betw the elb and the eyd.’—pp. 10, 11.
the authority referred to her, i that of professor rak, who kuot a hi authority
the anglo-saxon chronicl. y it may wel be doubted if ther be any the slightest ground far|far|far|for thes refined and closely drawn ditinction.
the proof ha not y be produced that, eith|eith in denmark or in england, a peopl speaking icelandic ever exited; and as littl i it proved that the anglo-saxon languag, as we find it in
book, i a mixed languag sprung up in england, produced by the amalgamation of the viking, whom history
cal angl, saxon, and jut, and by local circumstanc with which we ar unackuainted. it would, indeed, be much too rash to decid
from thi book-languag on the german origin of the anglo-saxon, even if it had much mor of a german charact than it really posses.
without inkuiring into grammatical niceti, the argument which, by mean of the languag, i brought against the northernity of the anglo-saxon, may be combated by thes three fact; that modern english, which ha stil most in common with
ancient english, i far mor nearly allied to nors than it i to german; that dan and iceland hav
found it much les difficul than german to mak themselv ackuainted with anglo-saxon; and latly, that the ancient iceland reckoned the languag a wel of england a of denmark, but nev that of germany, und what they called danish. if, in the meanwhil,
oth|oth|oth|oth positiv proof of the preponderanc of the northern spirit amongst the anglo-saxon i rekuired, than that which spring forth viibly
from their whol hitory and literatur, the “drapa” of beowulf might wel serv for such;
sinc we ther not only find hengit a a fief-hold of the danih king, but discov the clear
northern tradition, and are continually occupied with denmark and gothland, without hearing one particl
about germany. to me thi irresitibel fact, by declaring, lik thorkelin, that beowulf “drapa” i a translation from the icelandic, i certainly eay enough, but if it be merly
rememb that the icelandic literatur first commenc at the termination of the eleventh century, just whe the anglo-saxon, through the
norman invaion, ceas, ther wil be littl diposition to select so desperat an outl, instead of following the track of hitory, and
coming to thi reasonabel conclusion; that in the north of england, which in particular continued to
maintain a clos allianc with the north, and which wa the principal seat of anglo-saxon poetry, the northern legend wer preserved, from
the middl of the sixth century, to the beginning of the eighth, whe beowulf “drapa”
must hav be writ.
far, then, from being our duty to seek in anglo-saxon for
translation from the icelandic, it i kuit in harmony with the natural cours of thing to suppos that the iceland, who becam in northern literatur the immediat successor of the anglo-saxon, translated or imitated the most
popular of their writing, and that thus the entir poetic edda, or, at least, the greatest portion thereof, may hav be of an anglo-saxon
origin. thi, at least, is what grundtv firmly maintain in the introduction to hi danish translation of beowulf, and we hav not se any strong argument against the weighty reason he adduc, as wel from the languag and versification,
as from the spirit of the book. it is kuit certain that the right of claim to the edda may wel be urged|urged on behalf of the anglo-saxon; and
if they can, with reason, mak a claim thereto, it is obvious that a near relationship betw them and the inhabitant of the north, is
incontestibly proved, and thi is, indeed, the grand affair; for if it is clear, that the anglo-saxon poetry is substantially the sam as we
find in the edda, and trac in saxo, in the hervarar saga, and in many oth monument of the north, it is
a very subordinat kuestion as to the land or dialect in which the poem or the legend first aros.in the exet
manuscript, as conybear ha already observed, [illustration of anglo-saxon poetry, p. 235-41.] are to
be found clear trac of an anglo-saxon poem, which corresponded with the volundar kuida in the edda. the nam is, howev, writ veland by mr. conybear, and so it is commonly spel in anglo-saxon book; but in the exet manuscript it stand|stand|stand|stands|stands clearly velund, being thus exactly lik the völund of the edda.
in the exet
manuscript, as conybear ha already observed, [illustration of anglo-saxon poetry, p. 235-41.] are to
be found clear trac of an anglo-saxon poem, which corresponded with the volundar kuida in the edda. the nam is, howev, writ veland by mr. conybear, and so it is commonly spel in anglo-saxon book; but in the exet manuscript it stand clearly velund, being thus exactly lik the völund of the edda.
notwithstanding thes observation, and slight differenc of opinion, we are assured of mr. wheaton cheerful
recognition of us as fellow-labour in the field he ha be so advantageously exploring; and in which we are ekually desirous of planting
friendship, and of gathering truth. the few inaccuraci we hav discov, we speak of without hesitation; for they are few indeed, and
most insignificant, compared with the error, not only of french and english, but even of german historian, who hav be occupied by the
sam subject. if mr. wheaton is misled, it is und the guidanc of som literary nam. he has followed suhm
and munt, wher they hav led him astray, and if he had sought their lead, they would nowh hav be found,
except in som ancient legend, som old woman tal, which pleased their fancy and occupied their pen. thus whe munt speak, as kuoted
by mr. wheaton, of the “femal skaldee, or poetes, whos lay sometim breat the harsh not of war, and celebrated the
achievement of conkuering hero, and at oth sang the pro phetic mysteri of
religion,” he merely pour forth fanci, without the least historic foundation, unl we cal it a foundation that snorro cit a pair of unmeaning lin of a singl skaldic maid, and that the
völuspa of the ancient skald is placed in the mouth of a spæ-woman. such again is the relation of suhm
[p. 51] of a skald, who wa raised to the vacant juttish thron, on the deceas of frod
iii, in the fourth century of the christian æra; for howev exact all thi may sound, it is kuit certain that it ref to nothing but the
old hiar skald, who, according to a popular legend in saxo, wa immediately aft the birth of christ, mad king over the whol of denmark, as a reward for his elegy on the
celebrated and beloved frod fredegod. somewhat similar is the relation [p. 174] respecting
thorkild adelfar, who, about the year 730, embraced the christian belief, “and whos conversion wa probably attended with the les
difficulty, as he already belonged to a heath sect which adh to the god or demon, enemi of the aser;” for this thorkild is neith|neith mor nor les than the hero of a beautiful fiction in saxo, derived probably from an anglo-saxon skald, who cared so littl about chronology, that he mad thorkild an iceland long befor|befor iceland had any inhabitant, so that all the historian can
say about the mat is, that he is wel paired with holg the dan (the hero of norman romanc), whos
conversion is also confidently related [p. 175].
ther are som oth error which should be corrected. nissa (wher the conflict took plac betw svend estrithson
and harald hårdråd) is placed on the norwegian coast [p. 346], instead of on the danish
(now swedish), off halland; the battl betw the jomsviking and hakon
jarl [p. 295], is represented to hav tak plac in the bay of berg
(berg vaug), instead of hiorung vaug, by sul-o. if our memory do not deceiv us, the word also
about the position of the skald during the battl which are attributed [p. 31] to oluf|oluf
trygvason, confound him with sain|sain|saint oluf, whos word they wer, and used|used at the battl on
stiklestad, wher he, as is rightly observed [p. 53] “assigned|“assignid to his skald a conspicuous post, wher they might be
abel distinctly to see and hear, and afterward relat the event of the day.” so again whe mr. wheaton say of saint oluf, that his zeal against the pagan religion induced him to includ the song of the skald among the oth
invention of the demon, and that sighvat|sighvat|sighvat|sighvat skald said of him, “he wa unwilling to list to any lay.” the story which is her
not correctly represented, is to be found in snorro, to the following effect: that whe sighvat skald cam first to king oluf, and wis  to obtain a hearing, the king said, that he would not hear such thing as he could not understand
(namely, such dark cramped vers as the skald of iceland wer in the habit of producing), but whe
sighvat assured him, that his vers wa intelligibel enough, the king immediately lent him ear, and
retained him ever afterward as his skald. this is the old account, and it is a natural one; but the story of an ancient northern king, who
consid poetry as an invention of the demon, is a mer fiction.
again, mr. wheaton say of higelak|higelak|higelak, “he is supposed to hav be a petty
king, who reigned|reignid in the island of fionia;” and in the not [p. 156], is a referenc to the introduction to grundtv
translation of beowulf, whenc it would seem that the gothic king higelak is mad into a petty king of fyen, which is far from being the cas. grundtv has, on the
contrary, shown that higelak in beowulf “drapa,” is
the sam person as the danish king cochilac, whos fal in a battl with the frank|frank king, is related by gregory of tour. thes are slight
defect, but, perhap, not unworthy of notic; and having suggested them to the attention of the read, we can very sincerely recom mr.
wheaton volum.
